
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 THE SIX ENNEADS
 250 AD
 by Plotinus
 translated by Stephen MacKenna and B. S. Page
 London, P.L. Warner, publisher to the Medici Society
 [1917-1930]
 
 HTML formatting at sacred-texts.com by J.B. Hare, December 2003.
 This text is in the public domain.
 These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this
 notice of attribution is left intact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 Porphyry: On the Life of Plotinus and the Arrangement of his Work
 from Plotinus: The Enneads translated by Stephen MacKenna
 Typed by Owlsmirror/crows -- January 2004
 1. Plotinus, the philosopher our contemporary, seemed ashamed of being in the body.
 So deeply rooted was this feeling that he could never be induced to tell of his ancestry, his parentage, or his birthplace.
 He showed, too, an unconquerable reluctance to sit to a painter of a sculptor, and when Amelius persisted in urging him to allow of a portrait being made he asked him, 'Is it not enough to carry about this image in which nature has enclosed us? Do you really think I must also consent to leave, as a desired spectacle to posterity, an image of the image?'
 In view of this determined refusal Amelius brought his friend Carterius, the best artist of the day, to the Conferences, which were open to every comer, and saw to it that by long observation of the philosopher he caught his most striking personal traits. From the impressions thus stored in mind the artist drew a first sketch; Amelius made various suggestions towards bringing our the resemblance, and in this way, without the knowledge of Plotinus, the genius of Carterius gave us a lifelike portrait.
 2. Plotinus was often distressed by an intestinal complaint, but declined clysters, pronouncing the use of such remedies unbecoming in an elderly man: in the same way he refused such medicaments as contain any substance taken from wild beasts or reptiles: all the more, he remarked, since he could not approve of eating the flesh of animals reared for the table.
 He abstained from the use of the bath, contenting himself with a daily massage at home: when the terrible epidemic carried off his masseurs he renounced all such treatment: in a short while he contracted malign diphtheria.
 During the time I was about him there was no sign of any such malady, but after I sailed for Sicily the condition grew acute: his intimate, Eustochius, who was with him till his death, told me, on my return to Rome, that he became hoarse, so that his voice quite lost its clear and sonorous note, his sight grew dim and ulcers formed on his hands and feet.
 As he still insisted on addressing everyone by word of mouth, his condition prompted his friends to withdraw from his society: he therefore left Rome for Campania, retiring to a property which had belonged to Zethos, an old friend of his at this time dead. His wants were provided in part out of Zethos' estate, and for the rest were furnished form Minturnae, where Castricius' property lay.
 Of Plotinus' last moments Eustochius has given me an account. He himself was staying at Puteoli and was late in arriving: when he at last came, Plotinus said: 'I have been a long time waiting for you; I am striving to give back the Divine in myself to the Divine in the All.' As he spoke a snake crept under the bed on which he lay and slipped away into a hole in the wall: at the same moment Plotinus died.
 This was at the end of the second year of the reign of Claudius (A.D. 270), and, as Eustochius tells me, Plotinus was then sixty-six, I myself was at Lilybaeum at the time, Amelius at Apamea in Syria, Castricius at Rome; only Eustochius was by his side.
 Counting sixty-six years back from the second year of Claudius, we can fix Plotinus' birth at the thirteenth year of Severus (A.D. 204-5); but he never disclosed the month or day. This was because he did not desire any birthday sacrifice or feast; yet he himself sacrificed on the traditional birthdays of Plato and of Socrates, afterwards giving a banquet at which every member of the circle who was able was expected to deliver an address.
 3. Despite his general reluctance to talk of his own life, some few details he did often relate to us in the course of conversation.
 Thus he told how, at the age of eight, when he was already going to school, he still clung about his nurse and loved to bare her breasts and take suck: one day he was told he was a 'perverted imp', and so was shamed out of the trick.
 At twenty-seven he was caught by the passion for philosophy: he was directed to the most highly reputed professors to be found at Alexandria; but he used to come from their lectures saddened and discouraged. A friend to whom he opened his heart divined his temperamental craving and suggested Ammonius, whom he had not yet tried. Plotinus went, heard a lecture, and exclaimed to his comrade: 'This was the man I was looking for.'
 From that day he followed Ammonius continuously, and under his guidance made such progress in philosophy that he became eager to investigate the Persian methods and the system adopted among the Indians. It happened that the Emperor Gordian was at that time preparing his campaign against Persia; Plotinus joined the army and went on the expedition. He was then thirty-eight, for he had passed eleven entire years under Ammonius. When Gordian was killed in Mesopotamia, it was only with great difficulty that Plotinus came off safe to Antioch.
 At forty, in the reign of Philip, he settled in Rome.
 Erennius, Origen, and Plotinus had made a compact not to disclose any of the doctrines which Ammonius had revealed to them. Plotinus kept faith, and in all his intercourse with his associates divulged nothing of Ammonius' system. But the compact was broken, first by Erennius and then by Origen following suit: Origen, it is true, put in writing nothing but the treatise On the Spirit-Beings, and in Gallienus' reign that entitled The King the Sole Creator. Plotinus himself remained a long time without writing, but he began to base his Conferences on what he had gathered from his studies under Ammonius. In this way, writing nothing but constantly conferring with a certain group of associates, he passed ten years.
 He used to encourage his hearers to put questions, a liberty which, as Amelius told me, led to a great deal of wandering and futile talk.
 Amelius had entered the circle in the third year of Philip's reign, the third, too, of Plotinus' residence in Rome, and remained about him until the first year of Claudius, twenty-four years in all. He had come to Plotinus after an efficient training under Lysimachus: in laborious diligence he surpassed all his contemporaries; for example, he transcribed and arranged nearly all the works of Numenius, and was not far from having most of them off by heart. He also took notes of the Conferences and wrote them out in something like a hundred treatises which he has since presented to Hostilianus Hesychius of Apamea, his adopted son.
 4. I myself arrived from Greece in the tenth year of Gallienus' reign, accompanied by Antonius of Rhodes, and found Amelius an eighteen-years' associate of Plotinus, but still lacking the courage to write anything except for the notebooks, which had not reached their century. Plotinus, in this tenth year of Gallienus, was about fifty-nine: when I first met him I was thirty.
 From the first year of Gallienus Plotinus had begun to write upon such subjects as had arisen at the Conferences: when I first came to know him in this tenth year of the reign he had composed twenty-one treatises.
 They were, as I was able to establish, by no means given about freely. In fact the distribution was still grudging and secret; those that obtained them had passed the strictest scrutiny.
 Plotinus had given no titles to these treatises; everybody headed them for himself: I cite them here under the titles which finally prevailed, quoting the first words of each to facilitate identification.  
 
 
 1. On Beauty (I.6)
 2. On the Immortality of the Soul (IV.7)
 3. On Fate (III.1)
 4. On the Essence of the Soul (IV.2)
 5. On the Intellectual-Principle, on the Ideas, and on the Authentic-Existent (V.9)
 6. On the Descent of the Soul into Bodies (IV.8)
 7. How the Post-Primal derives from the Primal; and on The One(V.4)
 8. Whether all the Souls are One (IV.9)
 9. On the Good or the One (VI.9)
 10. ON the Three Primal Hypostases (V.1)
 11. On the Origin and Order of the Post-Primals (V.2)
 12. On the Two Orders of Matter (II.4)
 13. Various Questions (III.4)
 14. On the Circular Movement (II.2)
 15. On our Tutelary Spirit (III.4)
 16. On the Reasoned Dismissal (I.9)
 17. On Quality (II.6)
 18. Whether there are Ideas even of Particulars (V.7)
 19. On the Virtues (I.2)
 20. On Dialectic (I.3)
 21. Why the Soul is described as Intermediate between the Existent having parts and the undisparted Existent (IV.1)
 
 
 These are the twenty-one treatises which, as I have said, Plotinus had already written, by his fifty-ninth year, when I first came to him.
 5. I had been, it is true, in Rome a little before this tenth year of Gallienus, but at that time Plotinus was taking a summer holiday, engaging merely in conversation with his friends. After coming to know him I passed six years in close relation with him. Many question were threshed out in the Conferences of those six years and, under persuasion from Amelius and myself, he composed two treatises to establish:
 
 
 22, 23. That the Authentic-Existent is universally an integral, self-indentical Unity (VI.4,5)
 
 
 In immediate succession to these he composed two more: one is entitled:
 
 
 24. That there is no Intellectual Act in the Principle which transcends the Authentic-Existent; and on the Nature that has the Intellectual Act Primally and that which has it Secondarily (V.6)
 
 
 The other:
 
 
 25. On Potentiality and Actuality (II.5)
 
 
 After these come the following twenty:
 
 
 26. On the Impassibility of the Bodiless (III.6)
 27. On the Soul, First (IV.3)
 28. On the Soul, Second (IV.4)
 29. On the Soul, Third; or, How We See (IV.5)
 30. On Contemplation (III.8)
 31. On Intellectual Beauty (V.8)
 32. That the Intelligibles are not outside the Intellectual-Principle; and on the Good (V.5)
 33. Against the Gnostics (II.9)
 34. On Numbers (VI.6)
 35. Why Distant Objects appear Small (II.8)
 36. Whether Happiness depends upon Extension of Time (I.5)
 37. On Coalescence (II.7)
 38. How the Multitude of Ideas Exists; and on the Good (VI.7)
 39. On Free-Will (VI.8)
 40. On the World (II.1)
 41. On Sensation and Memory (IV.6)
 42. On the Kinds of Being, First (VI.6)
 43. On the Kinds of Being, Second (VI.2)
 44. On the Kinds of Being, Third (VI.3)
 45. On Eternity and Time (III.7)
 
 
 Thus we have twenty-four treatises composed during the six years of my association with him and dealing, as the titles indicate, with such problems as happened to arise at the Conferences; add the twenty-one composed before my arrival, and we have accounted for forty-five treatises.
 6. The following five more Plotinus wrote and sent to me while I was living in Sicily, where I had gone about the fifteenth year of Gallienus:
 
 
 46. On Happiness (I.4)
 47. On Providence, First (III.2)
 48. On Providence, Second (III.3)
 49. On the Conscious Hypostases and the All-Transcending (V.3)
 50. On Love (III.5)
 
 
 These five he sent me in the first year of Claudius: in the early months of the second year, shortly before his death, I received the following four:
 
 
 51. On Evil (I.8)
 52. Whether the Stars have Causal Operation (II.3)
 53. On the Animate (I.1)
 54. On Happiness (I.7)
 
 
 Adding these nine to the forty-five of the first and second sets we have a total of fifty-four treatises.
 According to the time of writing--early manhood, vigorous prime, worn-out constitution--so the tractates vary in power. The first twenty-one pieces manifest a slighter capacity, the talent being not yet matured to the fulness of nervous strength. The twenty-four produced in the mid-period display the utmost reach of the powers, and except for the short treatises among them, attain the highest perfection. The last nine were written when the mental strength was already waning, and of these the last four show less vigour even than the five preceding.
 7. Plotinus had a large following. Notable among the more zealous students, really devoted to philosophy, was Amelius of Tuscany, whose family name was Gentilianus. Amelius preferred to call himself Amerius, changing L for R, because, as he explained, it suited him better to be named from Amereia, Unification, then from Ameleia, Indifference.
 The group included also one Paulinus, a doctor of Scythopolis, whom Amelius used to call Mikkalos in allusion to his blundering habit of mind.
 Among closer personal friends was Eustochius of Alexandria, also a doctor, who came to know Plotinus towards the end of his life, and attended him until his death: Eutochius consecrated himself exclusively to Plotinus' system and became a veritable philosopher.
 Then there was Zoticus, at once critic and poet, who has amended the text of Antimachus' works and is the author of an exquisite poem upon the Atlantis story: is sight failed, and he died a little before Plotinus, as also did Paulinus.
 Another friend was Zethos, an Arabian by descent, who married a daughter of Ammonius' friend Theodosius. Zethos, too, was a doctor. Plotinus was deeply attached to him and was always trying to divert him from the political career in which he stood high. Plotinus was on the most familiar terms with him, and used to stay with him at his country place, six miles from Minturnae, a property which had formerly belonged to Castricius Firmus.
 Castricius was excelled by none of the group in appreciation of the finer side of life: he venerated Plotinus; he devoted himself in the most faithful comradeship to Amelius in every need, and was in all matters as loyal to myself as though I were his own brother.
 This was another example of a politician venerating the philosopher. There were also among Plotinus' hearers not a few members of the Senate, amongst whom Marcellus Orontius and Sabinillus showed the greatest assiduity in philosophical studies.
 Another Senator, Rogatianus, advanced to such detachment from political ambitions that he gave up all his property, dismissed all his slaves, renounced every dignity, and, on the point of taking up his praetorship, the lictors already at the door, refused to come out or to have anything to do with the office. He even abandoned his own house, spending his time here and there at this friends' and acquaintances', sleeping and eating with them and taking, at that, only one meal every other day. He had been a victim of gout, carried in a chair, but this new regime of abstinence and abnegation restored his health: he had been unable to stretch out his hands; he came to use them as freely as men living by manual labour. Plotinus took a great liking to Rogatianus and frequently praised him very highly, holding him up as a model to those aiming at the philosophical life.
 Then there was Serapion, an Alexandrian, who began life as a professional orator and later took to the study of philosophy, but was never able to conquer the vices of avarice and usury.
 I myself, Porphyry of Tyre, was one of Plotinus' very closest friends, and it was to me he entrusted the task of revising his writings.
 8. Such revision was necessary: Plotinus could not bear to go back on his work even for one re-reading; and indeed the condition of his sight would scarcely allow it: his handwriting was slovenly; he misjoined his words; he cared nothing about spelling; his one concern was for the idea: in these habits, to our general surprise, he remained unchanged to the very end.
 He used to work out his design mentally from first to last: when he came to set down his ideas, he wrote out at one jet all he had stored in mind as though he were copying from a book.
 Interrupted, perhaps, by someone entering on business, he never lost hold of his plan; he was able to meet all the demands of the conversation and still keep his own train of thought clearly before him; when he was fee again, he never looked over what he had previously written--his sight, it has been mentioned, did not allow of such re-reading--but he linked on what was to follow as if no distraction had occurred.
 Thus he was able to live at once within himself and for others; he never relaxed from his interior attention unless in sleep; and even his sleep was kept light be an abstemiousness that often prevented him taking as much as a piece of bread, and by this unbroken concentration upon his own highest nature.
 9. Several women were greatly attached to him, amongst them Gemina, in whose house he lived, and her daughter, called Gemina, too, after the mother, and Amphiclea, the wife Ariston, son Iamblichus; all three devoted themselves assiduously to philosophy.
 Not a few men and women of position, on the approach of death, had left their boys and girls, with all their property, in his care, feeling that with Plotinus for guardian the children would be in holy hands. His house therefore was filled with lads lasses, amongst them Potamon, in whose education he took such interest as often to hear the boy recite verses of his own composition.
 He always found time for those that came to submit returns of the children's property, and he looked closely to the accuracy of the accounts: 'Until the young people take to philosophy,' he used to say, 'their fortunes and revenues must be kept intact for them.' And yet all this labour and thought over the worldly interests of so many people never interrupted, during waking hours, his intention towards the Supreme.
 He was gentle, and always at the call of those having the slightest acquaintance with him. After spending twenty-six years in Rome, acting, too, as arbiter in many differences, he had never made an enemy of any citizen.
 10. Among those making profession of Philosophy at Rome was one Olympius, an Alexandrian, who had been for a little while a pupil of Ammonius.
 This man's jealous envy showed itself in continual insolence, and finally he grew so bitter that he even ventured sorcery, seeking to crush Plotinus by star-spells. But he found his experiments recoiling upon himself, and he confessed to his associates that Plotinus possessed 'a mighty soul, so powerful, as to be able to hurl every assault back upon those that sought his ruin'. Plotinus had felt the operation and declared that at that moment Olympius' 'limbs were convulsed and his body shrivelling like a money-bag pulled tight'. Olympius, perceiving on several attempts that he was endangering himself rather than Plotinus, desisted.
 In fact Plotinus possessed by birth something more than is accorded to other men. An Egyptian priest who had arrived in Rome and, through some friend, had been presented to the philosopher, became desirous of displaying his powers to him, and he offered to evoke a visible manifestation of Plotinus' presiding spirit. Plotinus readily consented and the evocation was made in the Temple of Isis, the only place, they say, which the Egyptian could find pure in Rome.
 At the summons a Divinity appeared, not a being of the spirit-ranks, and the Egyptian exclaimed: 'You are singularly graced; the guiding-spirit within you is not of the lower degree but a God.' It was not possible, however, to interrogate or even to contemplate this God any further, for the priest's assistant, who had been holding the birds to prevent them flying away, strangled them, whether through jealousy or in terror. Thus Plotinus had for indwelling spirit a Being of the more divine degree, and he kept his own divine spirit unceasingly intent upon that inner presence. It was this preoccupation that led him to write his treatise upon Our Tutelary Spirit, an essay in the explanation of the differences among spirit-guides.
 Amelius was scrupulous in observing the day of the New-Moon and other holy-days, and once asked Plotinus to join in some such celebration: Plotinus refused: 'It is for those Beings to come to me, not for me to go to them.'
 What was in his mind in so lofty an utterance we could not explain to ourselves and we dared not ask him.
 11. He had a remarkable penetration into character.
 Once a valuable necklace was stolen from Chione, who was living in honourable widowhood with her children in the same house as Plotinus: the servants were called before him: he scrutinized them all, then indicated one: 'This man is the thief.' The man was whipped but for some time persisted in denial: finally, however, he confessed, and restored the necklace.
 Plotinus foretold also the future of each of the children in the household: for instance, when questioned as to Polemon's character and destiny he said: 'He will be amorous and short-lived': and so it proved.
 I myself at one period had formed the intention of ending my life; Plotinus discerned my purpose; he came unexpectedly to my house where I had secluded myself, told me that my decision sprang not from reason but from mere melancholy and advised me to leave Rome. I obeyed and left for Sicily, which I chose because I heard that one Probus, a man of scholarly repute, was living there not far from Lilybaeum. Thus I was induced to abandon my first intention but was prevented from being with Plotinus between that time and his death.
 12. The Emperor Gallienus and his wife Salonina greatly honoured and venerated Plotinus, who thought to turn their friendly feeling to some good purpose. In Campania there had once stood, according to tradition, a City of Philosophers, a ruin now; Plotinus asked the Emperor to rebuild this city and to make over the surrounding district to the new-founded state; the population was to live under Plato's laws: the city was to be called Platonopolis; and Plotinus undertook to settle down there with his associates. He would have had his way without more ado but that opposition at court, prompted by jealousy, spite, or some such paltry motive, put an end to the plan.
 13. At the Conferences he showed the most remarkable power of going to the heart of a subject, whether in exposition or in explanation, and his phrasing was apt; but he made mistakes in certain words; for example, he said 'anamnemisketai' for 'anamimnesketai'--just such errors as he committed in his writing.
 When he was speaking his intellect visibly illuminated his face: always of winning presence, he became at these times still more engaging: a slight moisture gathered on his forehead; he radiated benignity.
 He was always as ready to entertain objections as he was powerful in meeting them. At one time I myself kept interrogating him during three days as to how the soul is associated with the body, and he continued explaining; a man called Thaumasius entered in the midst of our discussions; the visitor was more interested in the general drift of the system than in particular points, and said he wished to hear Plotinus expounding some theory as he would in a set treatise, but that he could not endure Porphyry's questions and answers: Plotinus asked, 'But if we cannot first solve the difficulties Porphyry raises what could go into the treatise?'
 14. In style Plotinus is concise, dense with thought, terse, more lavish of ideas than of words, most often expressing himself with a fervid inspiration. He followed his own path rather than that of tradition, but in his writings both the Stoic and Peripatetic doctrines are sunk; Aristotle's Metaphysics, especially, is condensed in them, all but entire.
 He had a thorough theoretical knowledge of Geometry, Mechanics, Optics, and Music, though it was not in his temperament to go practically into these subjects.
 At the Conferences he used to have treatises by various authors read aloud--among the Platonists it might be Severus of Cronius, Numenius, Gaius, or Atticus; and among the Peripatetics Aspasius, Alexander, Adrastus, or some such writer, at the call of the moment. But it was far from his way to follow any of these authors blindly; he took a personal, original view, applying Ammonius' method to the investigation of every problem.
 He was quick to absorb; a few words sufficed him to make clear the significance of some profound theory and so to pass on. After hearing Longinus' work On Causes and his Antiquary, he remarked: 'Longinus is a man of letters, but in no sense a philosopher.'
 One day Origen came to the conference-room; Plotinus blushed deeply and was on the point of bringing his lecture to an end; when Origen begged him to continue, he said: 'The zest dies down when the speaker feels that his hearers have nothing to learn from him.'
 15. Once on Plato's feast I read a poem, 'The Sacred Marriage'; my piece abounded in mystic doctrine conveyed in veiled words and was couched in terms of enthusiasm; someone exclaimed: 'Porphyry has gone mad'; Plotinus said to me so that all might hear: 'You have shown yourself at once poet, philosopher and hierophant.'
 The orator Diophanes one day read a justification of the Alcibiades of Plato's Banquet and maintained that the pupil, for the sake of advancement in virtue, should submit to the teacher without reserve, even to the extent of carnal commerce: Plotinus started up several times to leave the room but forced himself to remain; on the breaking up of the company he directed me to write a refutation. Diophanes refused to lend me his address and I had to depend on my recollection of his argument; but my refutation, delivered before the same audience, delighted Plotinus so much that during the very reading he repeatedly quoted: 'So strike and be a light to men.'
 When Eubulus, the Platonic Successor, wrote from Athens, sending treatises on some questions in Platonism. Plotinus had the writings put into my hands with instructions to examine them and report to him upon them.
 He paid some attention to the principles of Astronomy though he did not study the subject very deeply on the mathematical side. He went more searchingly into Horoscopy; when once he was convinced that its results were not to be trusted he had no hesitation in attacking the system frequently both at the Conferences and in his writings.
 16. Many Christians of this period--amongst them sectaries who had abandoned the old philosophy, men of the schools of Adelphius and Aquilinus--had possessed themselves of works by Alexander of Libya, by Philocomus, by Demostratus, and bby Lydus, and exhibited also Revelations bearing the names of Zoroaster, Zostrianus, Nicotheus, Allogenes, Mesus, and others of that order. Thus they fooled many, themselves fooled first; Plato, according to them, had failed to penetrate into the depth of Intellectual Being.
 Plotinus fequently attacked their position at the Conferences and finally wrote the treatise which I have headed Against the Gnostics: he left to us of the circle the task of examining what he himself passed over. Amelius proceeded as far as a fortieth treatise in refutation of the book of Zostrianus: I myself have shown on many counts that the Zoroastrian volume is spurious and modern, concocted by the sectaries in order to pretend that the doctrines they had embraced were those of the ancient sage.
 17. Some of the Greeks began to accuse Plotinus of appropriating the ideas of Numenius.
 Amelius, being informed of this charge by the Stoic and Platonist Trypho, challenged it in a treatise which he entitled The Difference between the Doctrines of Plotinus and Numenius. He dedicated the work to me, under the name of Basileus (or King). This really is my name; it is equivalent to Porphyry (Purple-robed) and translates the name I bear in my own tongue; for I am called Malchos, like my father, and 'Malchos' would give 'Basileus' in Greek. Longinus, in dedicating his work On Impulse to Cleodamus and myself, addressed us as 'Cleodamus and Malchus', just as Numenius translated the Latin 'Maximus' into its Greek equivalent 'Megalos'.
 Here followed Amelius' letter:
 'Amelius to Basileus, with all good wishes.
 'You have been, in your own phrase, pestered by the persistent assertion that our friend's doctrine is to be traced to Numenius of Apamea.
 'Now, if it were merely for those illustrious personages who spread this charge, you may be very sure I would never utter a word in reply. It is sufficiently clear that they are actuated solely by the famous and astonishing facility of speech of theirs when they assert, at one moment, that he is an idle babbler, next that he is a plagiarist, and finally that his plagiarisms are feeble in the extreme. Clearly in all this we have nothing but scoffing and abuse.
 'But your judgement has persuaded me that we should profit by this occasion firstly to provide ourselves with a useful memorandum of the doctrines that have won our adhesion, and secondly to bring about a more complete knowledge of the system--long celebrated thought it be--to the glory of our friend, a man so great as Plotinus.
 'Hence I now bring you the promised Reply, executed, as you and your self know, in three days. You must judge it with reasonable indulgence; this is no orderly and elaborate defence composed in step-by-step correspondence with the written indictment: I have simply set down, as they occurred to me, my recollections of our frequent discussions. You will admit, also, that it is by no means easy to grasp the meaning of a writer who (like Numenius), now credited with the opinion we also hold, varies in the terms he uses to express the one idea.
 'If I have falsified any essential of the doctrine, I trust to your good nature to set me right: I am reminded of the phrase in the tragedy: A busy man and far from the teachings of our master I must needs correct and recant. Judge how much I wish to give you pleasure. Good health.'
 18. This letter seemed worth insertion as showing, not merely that some contemporary judgement pronounced Plotinus to be parading on the strength of Numenius' ideas, but that he was even despised as a word-spinner.
 The fact is that these people did not understand his teaching: he was entirely free from all the inflated pomp of the professor: his lectures had the air of conversation, and he never forced upon his hearers the severely logical substructure of his thesis.
 I myself, when I first heard him, had the same experience. It led me to combat his doctrine in a paper in which I tried to show that the Intelligibles exist outside of the Intellectual-Principle. He had my work read to him by Amelius: at the end he smiled and said: 'You must clear up these difficulties, Amelius: Porphyry doesn't understand our position.' Amelius wrote a tract of considerable length In answer to Porphyry's Objections; I wrote a reply to the reply: Amelius replied to my reply; at my third attempt I came, though even so with difficulty, to grasp the doctrine: then only, I was converted, wrote a recantation, and read it before the circle. From that time on I was entrusted with Plotinus' writings and sought to stir in the master himself the ambition of organizing his doctrine and setting it down in more extended form. Amelius, too, under my prompting, was encouraged in composition.
 19. Longinus' estimate of Plotinus, formed largely upon indications I myself had given him in my letters, will be gathered from the following extract from one of his to me. He is asking me to leave Sicily and join him in Phoenicia, and to bring Plotinus' works with me. He says:
 'And send them at your convenience or, better, bring them; for I can never cease urging you to give the road towards us the preference over any other. If there is no better reason--and what intellectual gain can you anticipate form a visit to us?--at least there are old acquaintances and the mild climate which would do you good in the weak state of health you report. Whatever else you may be expecting, do not hope for anything new of my own, or even for the earlier works which you tell me you have lost; for there is a sad dearth of copyists here. I assure you it has taken me all this time to complete my set of Plotinus, and it was done only by calling off my scribe from all his routine work, and keeping him steadily to this one task.
 'I think that now, with what you have sent me, I have everything, though in a very imperfect state, for the manuscript is exceeding faulty. I had expected our friend Amelius to correct the scribal errors, but he evidently had something better to do. The copies are quite useless to me; I have been especially eager to examine the treatises On the Soul and On the Authentic-Existent, and these are precisely the most corrupted. It would be a great satisfaction to me if you would send me faithful transcripts for collation and return--though again I suggest to you not to send but to come in person, bringing me the correct copies of these treatises and of any that Amelius may have passed over. All that he brought with him I have been careful to make my own: how could I be content not to possess myself of all the writings of a man so worthy of the deepest veneration?
 'I repeat, what I have often said in your presence and in your absence, as on that occasion when you were at Tyre, that while much of the theory does not convince me, yet I am filled with admiration and delight over the general character of the work, the massive thinking of the man, the philosophic handling of problems; in my judgement investigators must class Plotinus' work with that holding the very highest rank.'
 20. This extended quotation from the most acute of the critics of our day--a writer who has passed judgement on nearly all his contemporaries--serves to show the estimate he came to set upon Plotinus of whom, at first, misled by ignorant talk, he had held a poor opinion.
 His notion, by the way, that the transcripts he acquired from Amelius were faulty sprang from his misunderstanding of Plotinus' style and phraseology; if there were ever any accurate copies, these were they, faithful reproductions from the author's own manuscript.
 Another passage from the work of Longinus, dealing with Amelius, Plotinus, and other metaphysicians of the day, must be inserted here to give a complete view of the opinion formed upon these philosophers by the most authoritative and most searching of critics. The work was entitled On the End: in Answer to Plotinus and Gentilianus Amelius. It opens with the following preface:
 'In our time, Marcellus, there have been many philosophers--especially in our youth--for there is a strange scarcity at present. When I was a boy, my parents' long journeys gave me the opportunity of seeing all the better-known teachers; and in later life those that still lived became known to me as my visits to this and that city and people brought me where they happened to live.
 'Some of these undertook the labour of developing their theories in formal works and so have bequeathed to the future the means of profiting by their services. Others thought they had done enough when they had convinced their own immediate hearers of the truth of their theories..
 'First of those that have written.
 'Among the Platonists there are Euclides, Democritus, Proclinus the philosopher of the Troad, and the two who still profess philosophy at Rome, Plotinus and his friend Gentilianus Amelius. Among the Stoics there are Themistocles and Phoibion and the two who flourished only a little while ago, Annius and Medius. And there is the Peripatetic, Heliodorus of Alexandria.
 'For those that have not written, there are among the Platonists Ammonius and Origen, two teachers whose lectures I myself attended during a long period, men greatly surpassing their contemporaries in mental power; and there are the Platonic Successors at Athens, Theodotus and Eubulus.
 'No doubt some writing of a metaphysical order stands to the credit of this group: Origen wrote On Spirit-Beings, Eubulus On the Philebus and Gorgias, and the objections urged by Aristotle to Plato's Republic; but this is not enough to class either of them with systematic authors. This was side-play; authorship was not in the main plan of their careers.
 'Among Stoic teachers that refrained from writing we have Herminus and Lysimachus, and the two living at Athens, Musonius and Athenaeus; among Peripatetics, Ammonius and Ptolemaeus.
 'The two last were the most accomplished scholars of their time, Ammonius especially being unapproached in breadth of learning; but neither produced any systematic work; we have from them merely verses and duty-speeches; and these I cannot think to have been preserved with their consent; they did not concern themselves about formal statement of their doctrine, and it is not likely they would wish to be known in after times by compositions of so trivial a nature.
 'To return to the writers; some of them, like Euclides, Democritus, and Proclinus, confined themselves to the mere compilation and transcription of passages from earlier authorities. Others diligently worked over various minor points in the investigations of the ancients, and put together books dealing with the same subjects. Such were Annius, Medius, and Phoibion, the last especially choosing to be distinguished for style rather than for systematic thinking. In the same class must be ranked Heliodorus; his writings contribute nothing to the organization of the thought which he found to his hand in the teaching of earlier workers.
 'Plotinus and Gentilianus Amelius alone display the true spirit of authorship; they treat of a great number of questions and they bring a method of their own to the treatment.
 'Plotinus, it would seem, set the principles of Pythagoras and of Plato in a clearer light than anyone before him; on the same subjects, Numenius, Cronius, Moderatus, and Thrasyllus fall far short of him in precision and fullness. Amelius set himself to walk in Plotinus' steps and adopted most of Plotinus' opinions; his method, however, was diffuse an, unlike his friend, he indulges in an extravagance of explanation. 'Only these two seem to me worth study. What profit can anyone expect from troubling the works of any of the others to the neglect of the originals on which they drew? They bring us nothing of their own, not even a novel augment, much less a leading idea, and are too unconcerned even to set side by side the most generally adopted theories or to choose the better among them.
 'My own method has been different; as for example when I replied to Gentilianus upon Plato's treatment of Justice and in a review I undertook of Plotinus' work On the Ideas. This latter was in the form of a reply to Basileus of Tyre, my friend as theirs. He had preferred Plotinus' system to mine and had written several works in the manner of his master, amongst them a treatise supporting Plotinus' theory of the Idea against that which I taught. I endeavoured, not, I think, unsuccessfully, to show that his change of mind was mistaken.
 'In these two essays I have ranged widely over the doctrines of this school, as also in my Letter to Amelius which, despite the simple title with which I contented myself, has the dimensions of a book, being a reply to a treatise he addressed to me from Rome under the title On Plotinus' Philosophic Method.'
 21. This Preface leaves no doubt of Longinus' final verdict: he ranks Plotinus and Amelius above all authors of his time in the multitude of questions they discuss; he credits them with an original method of investigation: in his judgement they by no means took their system from Numenius or gave a first place to his opinions, but followed the Pythagorean and Platonic schools; finally he declares the writings of Numenius, Cronius, Moderatus, and Thrasyllus greatly inferior in precision and fullness to those of Plotinus.
 Notice, by the way, that while AMelius id described as following in Plotinus' footsteps, it is indicated that his temperamental prolixity led him to delight in an extravagance of explanation foreign to his master: in the reference to myself, though I was then only at the beginning of my association with Plotinus--'Basileus of Tyre, my friend as theirs, who has written a good deal, has taken Plotinus as his model'--Longinus recognizes that I entirely avoided Amelius' unphilosophical prolixity and made Plotinus' manner my standard.
 Such a pronouncement upon the value of Plotinus' work, coming from so great an authority, the first of critics then as now, must certainly carry weight, and I may remark that if I had been able to confer with him, during such a visit as he proposed, he would not have written to combat doctrines which he had not thoroughly penetrated.
 22. But why talk, to use Hesiod's phrase, 'About Oak and Rock'? If we are to accept the evidence of the wise--who could be wiser than a God? And here the witness is the same God that said with truth:
 
 
 'I have numbered the sands and taken the measure of the sea; I understand the dumb and hear where there has been no speech.'
 
 
 Apollo was consulted by Amelius, who desired to learn where Plotinus' soul had gone. And Apollo, who uttered of Socrates that great praise, 'Of all men, Socrates the wisest'--you shall hear what a full and lofty oracle Apollo rendered upon Plotinus.
 I raise an undying song, to the memory of a gently friend, a hymn of praise woven to the honey-sweet tones of my lyre under the touch of the golden plectrum.
 The Muses, too, I call to lift the voice with me in strains of many-toned exultation, in passion ranging over all the modes of song: even as of old they raised the famous chant to the glory of Aeacides in the immortal ardours of the Homeric line.
 Come, then, Sacred Chorus, let us intone with one great sound the utmost of all song, I Phoebus, Bathychaites, singing in the midst.
 Celestial! Man at first but now nearing the diviner ranks! the bonds of human necessity are loosed for you and, strong of heart, you beat your eager way from out the roaring tumult of the fleshly life to the shores of that wave-washed coast free from the thronging of the guilty, thence to take the grateful path of the sinless soul: where glows the splendour of God, where Right is throned in the stainless place, far from the wrong that mocks at law.
 Oft-times as you strove to rise above the bitter waves of this blood-drenched life, above the sickening whirl, toiling in the mid-most of the rushing flood and the unimaginable turmoil, oft-times, from the Ever-Blessed, there was shown to you the Term still close at hand:
 Oft-times, when your mind thrust out awry and was like to be rapt down unsanctioned paths, the Immortals themselves prevented, guiding you on the straightgoing way to the celestial spheres, pouring down before you a dense shaft of light that your eyes might see from amid the mournful gloom.
 Sleep never closed those eyes: high above the heavy murk of the mist you held them; tossed in the welter, you still had vision; still you saw sights many and fair not granted to all that labour in wisdom's quest.
 But not that you have cast the screen aside, quitted the tomb that held your lofty soul, you enter at once the heavenly consort: where fragrant breezes play, where all is unison and winning tenderness and guileless joy, and the place is lavish of the nectar-streams the unfailing Gods bestow, with the blandishments of the Loves, and delicious airs, and tranquil sky:
 where Minos and Rhadamanthus dwell, great brethren of the golden race of mighty Zeus; where dwell the just Aeacus, and Plato, consecrated power, and stately Pythagoras and all else that form the Choir of Immortal Love, that share their parentage with the most blessed spirits, there where the heart is ever lifted in joyous festival.
 O Blessed One, you have fought your many fights; now, crowned with unfading life, your days are with the Ever-Holy.
 Rejoicing Muses, let us stay our song and the subtle windings of our dance; thus much I could but tell, to my golden lyre, of Plotinus, the hallowed soul.
 23. Good and kindly, singularly gentle and engaging: thus the oracle presents him, and so in fact we found him. Sleeplessly alert--Apollo tells--pure of soul, ever striving towards the divine which he loved with all his being, he laboured strenuously to free himself and rise above the bitter waves of this blood-drenched life: and this is why to Plotinus--God-like and lifting himself often, by the ways of meditation and by the methods Plato teaches in the Banquet, to the first and all-transcendent God--that God appeared, the God who has neither shape nor form but sits enthroned above the Intellectual-Principle and all the Intellectual-Sphere.
 'There was shown to Plotinus the Term ever near': for the Term, the one end, of his life was to become Uniate, to approach to the God over all: and four times, during the period I passed with him, he achieved this Term, by no mere latent fitness but by the ineffable Act.
 To this God, I also declare, I Porphyry, that in my sixty-eighth year I too was once admitted and I entered into Union.
 We are told that often when he was leaving the way, the Gods set him on the true path again, pouring down before him a dense shaft of light; here we are to understand that in his writing he was overlooked and guided by the divine powers.
 'In this sleepless vision within and without,' the oracle says, 'your eyes have beheld sights many and fair not vouchsafed to all that take the philosophic path': contemplation in man may sometimes be more than human, but compare it with the True-Knowing of the Gods and, wonderful though it be, it can never plunge into the depths their divine vision fathoms.
 Thus far the Oracle recounts what Plotinus accomplished and to what heights he attained while still in the body: emancipated from the body, we are told how he entered the celestial circle where all is friendship, tender delight, happiness, and loving union with God, where Minos and Rhadamanthus and Aeacus, the sons of God, are enthroned as judges of souls--not, however, to hold him to judgement but as welcoming him to their consort to which are bidden spirits pleasing to the Gods--Plato, Pythagoras, and all the people of the Choir of Immortal Love, there where the blessed spirits have their birth-home and live in days filled full of 'joyous festival' and made happy by the Gods.
 24. I have related Plotinus' life; something remains to tell of my revision and arrangement of his writings. This task he himself had imposed upon me during his lifetime and I had pledged myself to him and to the circle to carry it out.
 I judged that in the case of treatises which, like these, had been issued without consideration of logical sequence it was best to disregard the time-order.
 Apollodorus, the Athenian, edited in ten volumes the collected works of Epicharmus, the comedy writer; Andronicus, the Peripatetic, Classified the works ofAristotle and of Theoophrastus according to subject, bringing together the discussions of related topics: I have adopted a similar plan.
 I had fifty-four treatises before me: I divided them into six sets of nine, an arrangement which pleased me by the happy combination of the perfect number six with the nines: to each such ennead I assigned matter of one general nature, leading off with the themes presenting the least difficulty.
 THE FIRST ENNEAD, on this method, contains the treatises of a more ethical tendency:
 
 
 1. On the Animate and the Man.
 2. On the Virtues.
 3. On Dialectic.
 4. On Happiness.
 5. Whether Happiness depends on Extension of Time.
 6. On Beauty.
 7. On the Primal Good and Secondary forms of Good.
 8. On Evil. 
 9. On the Reasoned Withdrawal from Life.
 
 
 THE SECOND ENNEAD, following the more strictly ethical First, is physical, containing the disquisitions on the world and all that belongs to the world:
 
 
 1. On the World.
 2. On the Circular Movement.
 3. Whether the Stars have Causal Operation.
 4. On the Two Orders of Matter.
 5. On Potentiality and Actuality.
 6. On Quality and Form.
 7. On Coalescence.
 8. Why Distant Objects appear Small.
 9. Against those Declaring the Creator of the World, and the World itself, to be Evil.
 
 
 THE THIRD ENNEAD, still keeping to the World, discusses the philosophical implications of some of its features:
 
 
 1. On Fate.
 2. The First Treatise on Providence.
 3. The Second Treatise on Providence.
 4. On Our Tutelary Spirit.
 5. On Love.
 6. On the Impassibility of the Bodiless.
 7. On Eternity and Time.
 8. On Nature, Contemplation, and The One.
 9. Various Questions.
 
 
 25. These first three Enneads constitute in my arrangement one self-contained section.
 The treatise on Our Tutelary Spirit is placed in the Third Ennead because this Spirit is not discussed as it is in itself, and the essay by its main content falls into the class dealing with the origin of man. Similar reasons determined the inclusion in this set of the treatise on Love. That on Eternity and Time is placed in this Third Ennead in virtue of its treatment of Time: that on Nature, Contemplation, and The One, because of the discussion of Nature contained in it.
 Next to the two dealing with the world comes the FOURTH ENNEAD containing the treatises dealing with the Soul:
 
 
 1. On the Essence of the Soul (I)
 2. On the Essence of the Soul (II)
 3. Questions referring to the Soul (I)
 4. Questions referring to the Soul (II)
 5. Questions referring to the Soul (III)
 6. On Sensation and Memory.
 7. On the Immortality of the Soul.
 8. On the Descent of the Soul into Bodies.
 9. Whether all Souls are One.
 
 
 THE FIFTH ENNEAD--following upon that dealing with the Soul--contains the treatises upon the Intellectual-Principle, each of which had also some reference to the All-Transcending and to the Intellectual-Principle in the Soul, and to the Ideas:
 
 
 1. On the three Primal Hypostases.
 2. On the Origin and Order of the Post-Primals.
 3. On the Conscious Hypostases and the All-Transcending.
 4. How the Post-Primal derives from the Primal, and on the One.
 5. That the Intelligibles are not outside the Intellectual-Principle, and on the Good.
 6. That there is no Intellectual Act in the Principle which transcends the Authentic-Existent; and on the Nature that has the Intellectual Act Primally and that which has it Secondarily.
 7. Whether there are Ideas even of Particulars.
 8. On Intellectual Beauty.
 9. On the Intellectual-Principle, on the Ideas, and on the Authentic-Existent.
 
 
 26. These Fourth and Fifth Enneads, again, I have arranged in the form of one distinct section.
 The last Ennead, the Sixth, constitutes one other section, so that we have the entire work of Plotinus in three sections, the first containing three Enneads, the second two, the third one Ennead.
 The content of the third section, that is of the SIXTH ENNEAD, is as follows:
 
 
 1,2,3. On the Kinds of Being.
 4,5. That the Authentic-Existent, on and identical, is everywhere present, integrally.
 6. On Numbers.
 7. How the Multitude of Ideas Exists; and on the Good
 8. On Free-Will and the Will of the One.
 9. On the Good, or The One.
 
 
 Thus, in sum, I have arranged the fifty-four treatises, constituting Plotinus' entire work, into six sets of nine: to some of the treatises I have further added commentaries--irregularly, as friends asked for enlightenment on this or that point; finally for all the treatises, except that on Beauty, which was not to hand, I have written Summaries which follow the chronological order: in this department of my work besides the Summaries will be found Developments; the numbering of these also adopts the chronological order.
 Now I have only to go once more through the entire work, see to the punctuation, and correct any verbal errors; what else has solicited my attention, the reader will discover for himself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footnotes
  These first words are omitted. Ennead standard reference is added.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THE FIRST ENNEAD
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIRST TRACTATE.
 
 THE ANIMATE AND THE MAN.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Pleasure and distress, fear and courage, desire and aversion,
 where have these affections and experiences their seat?
 
 Clearly, either in the Soul alone, or in the Soul as 
 employing the
 body, or in some third entity deriving from both. And for this third
 entity, again, there are two possible modes: it might be either a
 blend or a distinct form due to the blending.
 
 And what applies to the affections applies also to whatsoever
 acts, physical or mental, spring from them.
 
 We have, therefore, to examine discursive-reason and the
 ordinary mental action upon objects of sense, and enquire whether
 these have the one seat with the affections and experiences, or
 perhaps sometimes the one seat, sometimes another.
 
 And we must consider also our acts of Intellection, 
 their mode and
 their seat.
 
 And this very examining principle, which investigates and
 decides in these matters, must be brought to light.
 
 Firstly, what is the seat of Sense-Perception? This is 
 the obvious
 beginning since the affections and experiences either are sensations
 of some kind or at least never occur apart from sensation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. This first enquiry obliges us to consider at the outset the
 nature of the Soul- that is whether a distinction is to be made
 between Soul and Essential Soul [between an individual Soul and the
 Soul-Kind in itself]. *
 
 
 * All matter shown in brackets is added by the translator for
 clearness' sake and, therefore, is not canonical. S.M.
 
 
 If such a distinction holds, then the Soul [in man] is some sort
 of a composite and at once we may agree that it is a 
 recipient and- if
 only reason allows- that all the affections and experiences really
 have their seat in the Soul, and with the affections every state and
 mood, good and bad alike.
 
 But if Soul [in man] and Essential Soul are one and the 
 same, then
 the Soul will be an Ideal-Form unreceptive of all those activities
 which it imparts to another Kind but possessing within itself that
 native Act of its own which Reason manifests.
 
 If this be so, then, indeed, we may think of the Soul as an
 immortal- if the immortal, the imperishable, must be 
 impassive, giving
 out something of itself but itself taking nothing from without
 except for what it receives from the Existents prior to itself from
 which Existents, in that they are the nobler, it cannot be sundered.
 
 Now what could bring fear to a nature thus unreceptive of all
 the outer? Fear demands feeling. Nor is there place for courage:
 courage implies the presence of danger. And such desires as are
 satisfied by the filling or voiding of the body, must be proper to
 something very different from the Soul, to that only which admits of
 replenishment and voidance.
 
 And how could the Soul lend itself to any admixture? An
 essential is not mixed. Or of the intrusion of anything alien? If it
 did, it would be seeking the destruction of its own nature. Pain
 must be equally far from it. And Grief- how or for what could it
 grieve? Whatever possesses Existence is supremely free, dwelling,
 unchangeable, within its own peculiar nature. And can any increase
 bring joy, where nothing, not even anything good, can accrue? What
 such an Existent is, it is unchangeably.
 
 Thus assuredly Sense-Perception, Discursive-Reasoning; 
 and all our
 ordinary mentation are foreign to the Soul: for sensation is a
 receiving- whether of an Ideal-Form or of an impassive body- and
 reasoning and all ordinary mental action deal with sensation.
 
 The question still remains to be examined in the matter of the
 intellections- whether these are to be assigned to the Soul- 
 and as to
 Pure-Pleasure, whether this belongs to the Soul in its 
 solitary state.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. We may treat of the Soul as in the body- whether it be set
 above it or actually within it- since the association of the two
 constitutes the one thing called the living organism, the Animate.
 
 Now from this relation, from the Soul using the body as an
 instrument, it does not follow that the Soul must share the body's
 experiences: a man does not himself feel all the experiences of the
 tools with which he is working.
 
 It may be objected that the Soul must however, have
 Sense-Perception since its use of its instrument must 
 acquaint it with
 the external conditions, and such knowledge comes by way of sense.
 Thus, it will be argued, the eyes are the instrument of seeing, and
 seeing may bring distress to the soul: hence the Soul may feel
 sorrow and pain and every other affection that belongs to the body;
 and from this again will spring desire, the Soul seeking the mending
 of its instrument.
 
 But, we ask, how, possibly, can these affections pass 
 from body to
 Soul? Body may communicate qualities or conditions to another body:
 but- body to Soul? Something happens to A; does that make it 
 happen to
 B? As long as we have agent and instrument, there are two distinct
 entities; if the Soul uses the body it is separate from it.
 
 But apart from the philosophical separation how does 
 Soul stand to
 body?
 
 Clearly there is a combination. And for this several modes are
 possible. There might be a complete coalescence: Soul might be
 interwoven through the body: or it might be an Ideal-Form detached
 or an Ideal-Form in governing contact like a pilot: or there might
 be part of the Soul detached and another part in contact, the
 disjoined part being the agent or user, the conjoined part ranking
 with the instrument or thing used.
 
 In this last case it will be the double task of philosophy to
 direct this lower Soul towards the higher, the agent, and 
 except in so
 far as the conjunction is absolutely necessary, to sever the agent
 from the instrument, the body, so that it need not forever have its
 Act upon or through this inferior.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. Let us consider, then, the hypothesis of a coalescence.
 
 Now if there is a coalescence, the lower is ennobled, the nobler
 degraded; the body is raised in the scale of being as made 
 participant
 in life; the Soul, as associated with death and unreason, is brought
 lower. How can a lessening of the life-quality produce an increase
 such as Sense-Perception?
 
 No: the body has acquired life, it is the body that will
 acquire, with life, sensation and the affections coming by
 sensation. Desire, then, will belong to the body, as the objects of
 desire are to be enjoyed by the body. And fear, too, will belong to
 the body alone; for it is the body's doom to fail of its joys and to
 perish.
 
 Then again we should have to examine how such a coalescence
 could be conceived: we might find it impossible: perhaps all this is
 like announcing the coalescence of things utterly 
 incongruous in kind,
 let us say of a line and whiteness.
 
 Next for the suggestion that the Soul is interwoven through the
 body: such a relation would not give woof and warp community of
 sensation: the interwoven element might very well suffer no change:
 the permeating soul might remain entirely untouched by what affects
 the body- as light goes always free of all it floods- and 
 all the more
 so, since, precisely, we are asked to consider it as diffused
 throughout the entire frame.
 
 Under such an interweaving, then, the Soul would not be
 subjected to the body's affections and experiences: it would be
 present rather as Ideal-Form in Matter.
 
 Let us then suppose Soul to be in body as Ideal-Form in Matter.
 Now if- the first possibility- the Soul is an essence, a
 self-existent, it can be present only as separable form and will
 therefore all the more decidedly be the Using-Principle [and 
 therefore
 unaffected].
 
 Suppose, next, the Soul to be present like axe-form on 
 iron: here,
 no doubt, the form is all important but it is still the axe, the
 complement of iron and form, that effects whatever is effected by
 the iron thus modified: on this analogy, therefore, we are even more
 strictly compelled to assign all the experiences of the 
 combination to
 the body: their natural seat is the material member, the instrument,
 the potential recipient of life.
 
 Compare the passage where we read* that "it is absurd to suppose
 that the Soul weaves"; equally absurd to think of it as desiring,
 grieving. All this is rather in the province of something 
 which we may
 call the Animate.
 
 
 * "We read" translates "he says" of the text, and always 
 indicates
 a reference to Plato, whose name does not appear in the translation
 except where it was written by Plotinus. S.M.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. Now this Animate might be merely the body as having life: it
 might be the Couplement of Soul and body: it might be a third and
 different entity formed from both.
 
 The Soul in turn- apart from the nature of the Animate- must be
 either impassive, merely causing Sense-Perception in its
 yoke-fellow, or sympathetic; and, if sympathetic, it may have
 identical experiences with its fellow or merely correspondent
 experiences: desire for example in the Animate may be something
 quite distinct from the accompanying movement or state in 
 the desiring
 faculty.
 
 The body, the live-body as we know it, we will consider later.
 
 Let us take first the Couplement of body and Soul. How could
 suffering, for example, be seated in this Couplement?
 
 It may be suggested that some unwelcome state of the 
 body produces
 a distress which reaches to a Sensitive-Faculty which in turn merges
 into Soul. But this account still leaves the origin of the sensation
 unexplained.
 
 Another suggestion might be that all is due to an opinion or
 judgement: some evil seems to have befallen the man or his
 belongings and this conviction sets up a state of trouble in the
 body and in the entire Animate. But this account leaves still a
 question as to the source and seat of the judgement: does it 
 belong to
 the Soul or to the Couplement? Besides, the judgement that evil is
 present does not involve the feeling of grief: the judgement might
 very well arise and the grief by no means follow: one may think
 oneself slighted and yet not be angry; and the appetite is not
 necessarily excited by the thought of a pleasure. We are, thus, no
 nearer than before to any warrant for assigning these affections to
 the Couplement.
 
 Is it any explanation to say that desire is vested in a
 Faculty-of-desire and anger in the Irascible-Faculty and,
 collectively, that all tendency is seated in the Appetitive-Faculty?
 Such a statement of the facts does not help towards making the
 affections common to the Couplement; they might still be 
 seated either
 in the Soul alone or in the body alone. On the one hand if the
 appetite is to be stirred, as in the carnal passion, there must be a
 heating of the blood and the bile, a well-defined state of the body;
 on the other hand, the impulse towards The Good cannot be a joint
 affection, but, like certain others too, it would belong necessarily
 to the Soul alone.
 
 Reason, then, does not permit us to assign all the affections to
 the Couplement.
 
 In the case of carnal desire, it will certainly be the Man that
 desires, and yet, on the other hand, there must be desire in the
 Desiring-Faculty as well. How can this be? Are we to suppose that,
 when the man originates the desire, the Desiring-Faculty moves to
 the order? How could the Man have come to desire at all 
 unless through
 a prior activity in the Desiring-Faculty? Then it is the
 Desiring-Faculty that takes the lead? Yet how, unless the body be
 first in the appropriate condition?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. It may seem reasonable to lay down as a law that when any
 powers are contained by a recipient, every action or state
 expressive of them must be the action or state of that 
 recipient, they
 themselves remaining unaffected as merely furnishing efficiency.
 
 But if this were so, then, since the Animate is the recipient of
 the Causing-Principle [i.e., the Soul] which brings life to the
 Couplement, this Cause must itself remain unaffected, all the
 experiences and expressive activities of the life being vested in
 the recipient, the Animate.
 
 But this would mean that life itself belongs not to the Soul but
 to the Couplement; or at least the life of the Couplement 
 would not be
 the life of the Soul; Sense-Perception would belong not to the
 Sensitive-Faculty but to the container of the faculty.
 
 But if sensation is a movement traversing the body and 
 culminating
 in Soul, how the soul lack sensation? The very presence of the
 Sensitive-Faculty must assure sensation to the Soul.
 
 Once again, where is Sense-Perception seated?
 
 In the Couplement.
 
 Yet how can the Couplement have sensation independently of
 action in the Sensitive-Faculty, the Soul left out of count and the
 Soul-Faculty?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. The truth lies in the Consideration that the Couplement
 subsists by virtue of the Soul's presence.
 
 This, however, is not to say that the Soul gives itself as it is
 in itself to form either the Couplement or the body.
 
 No; from the organized body and something else, let us say a
 light, which the Soul gives forth from itself, it forms a distinct
 Principle, the Animate; and in this Principle are vested
 Sense-Perception and all the other experiences found to belong to
 the Animate.
 
 But the "We"? How have We Sense-Perception?
 
 By the fact that We are not separate from the Animate so
 constituted, even though certainly other and nobler elements go to
 make up the entire many-sided nature of Man.
 
 The faculty of perception in the Soul cannot act by the
 immediate grasping of sensible objects, but only by the discerning
 of impressions printed upon the Animate by sensation: these
 impressions are already Intelligibles while the outer sensation is a
 mere phantom of the other [of that in the Soul] which is nearer to
 Authentic-Existence as being an impassive reading of Ideal-Forms.
 
 And by means of these Ideal-Forms, by which the Soul 
 wields single
 lordship over the Animate, we have Discursive-Reasoning,
 Sense-Knowledge and Intellection. From this moment we have
 peculiarly the We: before this there was only the "Ours"; but at
 this stage stands the WE [the authentic Human-Principle] loftily
 presiding over the Animate.
 
 There is no reason why the entire compound entity should not be
 described as the Animate or Living-Being- mingled in a lower phase,
 but above that point the beginning of the veritable man, 
 distinct from
 all that is kin to the lion, all that is of the order of the
 multiple brute. And since The Man, so understood, is essentially the
 associate of the reasoning Soul, in our reasoning it is this 
 "We" that
 reasons, in that the use and act of reason is a characteristic Act
 of the Soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. And towards the Intellectual-Principle what is our 
 relation? By
 this I mean, not that faculty in the soul which is one of the
 emanations from the Intellectual-Principle, but The
 Intellectual-Principle itself [Divine-Mind].
 
 This also we possess as the summit of our being. And we have It
 either as common to all or as our own immediate possession: or again
 we may possess It in both degrees, that is in common, since It is
 indivisible- one, everywhere and always Its entire self- and 
 severally
 in that each personality possesses It entire in the First-Soul [i.e.
 in the Intellectual as distinguished from the lower phase of the
 Soul].
 
 Hence we possess the Ideal-Forms also after two modes: in the
 Soul, as it were unrolled and separate; in the 
 Intellectual-Principle,
 concentrated, one.
 
 And how do we possess the Divinity?
 
 In that the Divinity is contained in the Intellectual-Principle
 and Authentic-Existence; and We come third in order after these two,
 for the We is constituted by a union of the supreme, the undivided
 Soul- we read- and that Soul which is divided among [living] bodies.
 For, note, we inevitably think of the Soul, though one undivided in
 the All, as being present to bodies in division: in so far as any
 bodies are Animates, the Soul has given itself to each of 
 the separate
 material masses; or rather it appears to be present in the bodies by
 the fact that it shines into them: it makes them living beings not
 by merging into body but by giving forth, without any change in
 itself, images or likenesses of itself like one face caught by many
 mirrors.
 
 The first of these images is Sense-Perception seated in the
 Couplement; and from this downwards all the successive images are to
 be recognized as phases of the Soul in lessening succession from one
 another, until the series ends in the faculties of generation and
 growth and of all production of offspring- offspring efficient in
 its turn, in contradistinction to the engendering Soul which [has no
 direct action within matter but] produces by mere inclination
 towards what it fashions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. That Soul, then, in us, will in its nature stand 
 apart from all
 that can cause any of the evils which man does or suffers; for all
 such evil, as we have seen, belongs only to the Animate, the
 Couplement.
 
 But there is a difficulty in understanding how the Soul can go
 guiltless if our mentation and reasoning are vested in it: for all
 this lower kind of knowledge is delusion and is the cause of much of
 what is evil.
 
 When we have done evil it is because we have been worsted by our
 baser side- for a man is many- by desire or rage or some evil image:
 the misnamed reasoning that takes up with the false, in 
 reality fancy,
 has not stayed for the judgement of the Reasoning-Principle: we have
 acted at the call of the less worthy, just as in matters of the
 sense-sphere we sometimes see falsely because we credit only 
 the lower
 perception, that of the Couplement, without applying the tests of
 the Reasoning-Faculty.
 
 The Intellectual-Principle has held aloof from the act and so is
 guiltless; or, as we may state it, all depends on whether we 
 ourselves
 have or have not put ourselves in touch with the Intellectual-Realm
 either in the Intellectual-Principle or within ourselves; for it is
 possible at once to possess and not to use.
 
 Thus we have marked off what belongs to the Couplement from what
 stands by itself: the one group has the character of body and never
 exists apart from body, while all that has no need of body for its
 manifestation belongs peculiarly to Soul: and the Understanding, as
 passing judgement upon Sense-Impressions, is at the point of the
 vision of Ideal-Forms, seeing them as it were with an answering
 sensation (i.e, with consciousness) this last is at any rate true of
 the Understanding in the Veritable Soul. For Understanding, the
 true, is the Act of the Intellections: in many of its manifestations
 it is the assimilation and reconciliation of the outer to the inner.
 
 Thus in spite of all, the Soul is at peace as to itself 
 and within
 itself: all the changes and all the turmoil we experience are the
 issue of what is subjoined to the Soul, and are, as have said, the
 states and experiences of this elusive "Couplement."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. It will be objected, that if the Soul constitutes the We
 [the personality] and We are subject to these states then the Soul
 must be subject to them, and similarly that what We do must 
 be done by
 the Soul.
 
 But it has been observed that the Couplement, too- especially
 before our emancipation- is a member of this total We, and in fact
 what the body experiences we say We experience. This then covers two
 distinct notions; sometimes it includes the brute-part, sometimes it
 transcends the brute. The body is brute touched to life; the true
 man is the other, going pure of the body, natively endowed with the
 virtues which belong to the Intellectual-Activity, virtues whose
 seat is the Separate Soul, the Soul which even in its dwelling here
 may be kept apart. [This Soul constitutes the human being] 
 for when it
 has wholly withdrawn, that other Soul which is a radiation [or
 emanation] from it withdraws also, drawn after it.
 
 Those virtues, on the other hand, which spring not from
 contemplative wisdom but from custom or practical discipline 
 belong to
 the Couplement: to the Couplement, too, belong the vices; 
 they are its
 repugnances, desires, sympathies.
 
 And Friendship?
 
 This emotion belongs sometimes to the lower part, 
 sometimes to the
 interior man.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. In childhood the main activity is in the Couplement and
 there is but little irradiation from the higher principles of our
 being: but when these higher principles act but feebly or rarely
 upon us their action is directed towards the Supreme; they work upon
 us only when they stand at the mid-point.
 
 But does not the include that phase of our being which stands
 above the mid-point?
 
 It does, but on condition that we lay hold of it: our entire
 nature is not ours at all times but only as we direct the mid-point
 upwards or downwards, or lead some particular phase of our 
 nature from
 potentiality or native character into act.
 
 And the animals, in what way or degree do they possess the
 Animate?
 
 If there be in them, as the opinion goes, human Souls that have
 sinned, then the Animating-Principle in its separable phase does not
 enter directly into the brute; it is there but not there to 
 them; they
 are aware only of the image of the Soul [only of the lower Soul] and
 of that only by being aware of the body organised and determined by
 that image.
 
 If there be no human Soul in them, the Animate is constituted
 for them by a radiation from the All-Soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. But if Soul is sinless, how come the expiations? Here surely
 is a contradiction; on the one side the Soul is above all guilt; on
 the other, we hear of its sin, its purification, its expiation; it
 is doomed to the lower world, it passes from body to body.
 
 We may take either view at will: they are easily reconciled.
 
 When we tell of the sinless Soul, we make Soul and
 Essential-Soul one and the same: it is the simple unbroken Unity.
 
 By the Soul subject to sin we indicate a groupment, we include
 that other, that phase of the Soul which knows all the states and
 passions: the Soul in this sense is compound, all-inclusive: it
 falls under the conditions of the entire living experience: this
 compound it is that sins; it is this, and not the other, that pays
 penalty.
 
 It is in this sense that we read of the Soul: "We saw it as
 those others saw the sea-god Glaukos." "And," reading on, "if we
 mean to discern the nature of the Soul we must strip it free of all
 that has gathered about it, must see into the philosophy of it,
 examine with what Existences it has touch and by kinship to what
 Existences it is what it is."
 
 Thus the Life is one thing, the Act is another and the Expiator
 yet another. The retreat and sundering, then, must be not from this
 body only, but from every alien accruement. Such accruement takes
 place at birth; or rather birth is the coming-into-being of 
 that other
 [lower] phase of the Soul. For the meaning of birth has been 
 indicated
 elsewhere; it is brought about by a descent of the Soul, something
 being given off by the Soul other than that actually coming down in
 the declension.
 
 Then the Soul has let this image fall? And this declension is it
 not certainly sin?
 
 If the declension is no more than the illuminating of an object
 beneath, it constitutes no sin: the shadow is to be attributed not
 to the luminary but to the object illuminated; if the object were
 not there, the light could cause no shadow.
 
 And the Soul is said to go down, to decline, only in that the
 object it illuminates lives by its life. And it lets the image fall
 only if there be nothing near to take it up; and it lets it fall,
 not as a thing cut off, but as a thing that ceases to be: the image
 has no further being when the whole Soul is looking toward the
 Supreme.
 
 The poet, too, in the story of Hercules, seems to give this
 image separate existence; he puts the shade of Hercules in the lower
 world and Hercules himself among the gods: treating the hero as
 existing in the two realms at once, he gives us a twofold Hercules.
 
 It is not difficult to explain this distinction. Hercules was a
 hero of practical virtue. By his noble serviceableness he was worthy
 to be a God. On the other hand, his merit was action and not the
 Contemplation which would place him unreservedly in the higher
 realm. Therefore while he has place above, something of him remains
 below.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. And the principle that reasons out these matters? Is it We
 or the Soul?
 
 We, but by the Soul.
 
 But how "by the Soul"? Does this mean that the Soul reasons by
 possession [by contact with the matters of enquiry]?
 
 No; by the fact of being Soul. Its Act subsists without
 movement; or any movement that can be ascribed to it must be utterly
 distinct from all corporal movement and be simply the Soul's 
 own life.
 
 And Intellection in us is twofold: since the Soul is 
 intellective,
 and Intellection is the highest phase of life, we have Intellection
 both by the characteristic Act of our Soul and by the Act of the
 Intellectual-Principle upon us- for this Intellectual-Principle is
 part of us no less than the Soul, and towards it we are ever rising.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SECOND TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON VIRTUE.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Since Evil is here, "haunting this world by necessary 
 law," and
 it is the Soul's design to escape from Evil, we must escape hence.
 
 But what is this escape?
 
 "In attaining Likeness to God," we read. And this is explained
 as "becoming just and holy, living by wisdom," the entire nature
 grounded in Virtue.
 
 But does not Likeness by way of Virtue imply Likeness to some
 being that has Virtue? To what Divine Being, then, would our
 Likeness be? To the Being- must we not think?- in Which, above all,
 such excellence seems to inhere, that is to the Soul of the 
 Kosmos and
 to the Principle ruling within it, the Principle endowed 
 with a wisdom
 most wonderful. What could be more fitting than that we, living in
 this world, should become Like to its ruler?
 
 But, at the beginning, we are met by the doubt whether even in
 this Divine-Being all the virtues find place- Moral-Balance
 [Sophrosyne], for example; or Fortitude where there can be no danger
 since nothing is alien; where there can be nothing alluring 
 whose lack
 could induce the desire of possession.
 
 If, indeed, that aspiration towards the Intelligible which is in
 our nature exists also in this Ruling-Power, then need not look
 elsewhere for the source of order and of the virtues in ourselves.
 
 But does this Power possess the Virtues?
 
 We cannot expect to find There what are called the Civic
 Virtues, the Prudence which belongs to the reasoning faculty; the
 Fortitude which conducts the emotional and passionate nature; the
 Sophrosyne which consists in a certain pact, in a concord between
 the passionate faculty and the reason; or Rectitude which is the due
 application of all the other virtues as each in turn should 
 command or
 obey.
 
 Is Likeness, then, attained, perhaps, not by these virtues of
 the social order but by those greater qualities known by the same
 general name? And if so do the Civic Virtues give us no help at all?
 
 It is against reason, utterly to deny Likeness by these while
 admitting it by the greater: tradition at least recognizes 
 certain men
 of the civic excellence as divine, and we must believe that these
 too had in some sort attained Likeness: on both levels there 
 is virtue
 for us, though not the same virtue.
 
 Now, if it be admitted that Likeness is possible, though by a
 varying use of different virtues and though the civic virtues do not
 suffice, there is no reason why we should not, by virtues peculiar
 to our state, attain Likeness to a model in which virtue has 
 no place.
 
 But is that conceivable?
 
 When warmth comes in to make anything warm, must there needs be
 something to warm the source of the warmth?
 
 If a fire is to warm something else, must there be a fire to
 warm that fire?
 
 Against the first illustration it may be retorted that the
 source of the warmth does already contain warmth, not by an infusion
 but as an essential phase of its nature, so that, if the 
 analogy is to
 hold, the argument would make Virtue something communicated to the
 Soul but an essential constituent of the Principle from 
 which the Soul
 attaining Likeness absorbs it.
 
 Against the illustration drawn from the fire, it may be 
 urged that
 the analogy would make that Principle identical with virtue, whereas
 we hold it to be something higher.
 
 The objection would be valid if what the soul takes in were one
 and the same with the source, but in fact virtue is one thing, the
 source of virtue quite another. The material house is not identical
 with the house conceived in the intellect, and yet stands in its
 likeness: the material house has distribution and order 
 while the pure
 idea is not constituted by any such elements; distribution, order,
 symmetry are not parts of an idea.
 
 So with us: it is from the Supreme that we derive order and
 distribution and harmony, which are virtues in this sphere: the
 Existences There, having no need of harmony, order or distribution,
 have nothing to do with virtue; and, none the less, it is by our
 possession of virtue that we become like to Them.
 
 Thus much to show that the principle that we attain Likeness by
 virtue in no way involves the existence of virtue in the Supreme.
 But we have not merely to make a formal demonstration: we must
 persuade as well as demonstrate.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. First, then, let us examine those good qualities by which we
 hold Likeness comes, and seek to establish what is this thing which,
 as we possess it, in transcription, is virtue but as the Supreme
 possesses it, is in the nature of an exemplar or archetype and is
 not virtue.
 
 We must first distinguish two modes of Likeness.
 
 There is the likeness demanding an identical nature in 
 the objects
 which, further, must draw their likeness from a common principle:
 and there is the case in which B resembles A, but A is a Primal, not
 concerned about B and not said to resemble B. In this second case,
 likeness is understood in a distinct sense: we no longer look for
 identity of nature, but, on the contrary, for divergence since the
 likeness has come about by the mode of difference.
 
 What, then, precisely is Virtue, collectively and in the
 particular? The clearer method will be to begin with the particular,
 for so the common element by which all the forms hold the 
 general name
 will readily appear.
 
 The Civic Virtues, on which we have touched above, are a 
 principle
 or order and beauty in us as long as we remain passing our life
 here: they ennoble us by setting bound and measure to our desires
 and to our entire sensibility, and dispelling false judgement- and
 this by sheer efficacy of the better, by the very setting of the
 bounds, by the fact that the measured is lifted outside of the
 sphere of the unmeasured and lawless.
 
 And, further, these Civic Virtues- measured and ordered 
 themselves
 and acting as a principle of measure to the Soul which is as 
 Matter to
 their forming- are like to the measure reigning in the 
 over-world, and
 they carry a trace of that Highest Good in the Supreme; for, while
 utter measurelessness is brute Matter and wholly outside of
 Likeness, any participation in Ideal-Form produces some
 corresponding degree of Likeness to the formless Being There. And
 participation goes by nearness: the Soul nearer than the body,
 therefore closer akin, participates more fully and shows a godlike
 presence, almost cheating us into the delusion that in the 
 Soul we see
 God entire.
 
 This is the way in which men of the Civic Virtues attain 
 Likeness.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. We come now to that other mode of Likeness which, we read, is
 the fruit of the loftier virtues: discussing this we shall penetrate
 more deeply into the essence of the Civic Virtue and be able 
 to define
 the nature of the higher kind whose existence we shall establish
 beyond doubt.
 
 To Plato, unmistakably, there are two distinct orders of virtue,
 and the civic does not suffice for Likeness: "Likeness to God," he
 says, "is a flight from this world's ways and things": in 
 dealing with
 the qualities of good citizenship he does not use the simple term
 Virtue but adds the distinguishing word civic: and elsewhere he
 declares all the virtues without exception to be purifications.
 
 But in what sense can we call the virtues purifications, and how
 does purification issue in Likeness?
 
 As the Soul is evil by being interfused with the body, and by
 coming to share the body's states and to think the body's 
 thoughts, so
 it would be good, it would be possessed of virtue, if it 
 threw off the
 body's moods and devoted itself to its own Act- the state of
 Intellection and Wisdom- never allowed the passions of the body to
 affect it- the virtue of Sophrosyne- knew no fear at the parting
 from the body- the virtue of Fortitude- and if reason and the
 Intellectual-Principle ruled- in which state is Righteousness. Such
 a disposition in the Soul, become thus intellective and immune to
 passion, it would not be wrong to call Likeness to God; for the
 Divine, too, is pure and the Divine-Act is such that 
 Likeness to it is
 Wisdom.
 
 But would not this make virtue a state of the Divine also?
 
 No: the Divine has no states; the state is in the Soul. 
 The Act of
 Intellection in the Soul is not the same as in the Divine: of things
 in the Supreme, Soul grasps some after a mode of its own, some not
 at all.
 
 Then yet again, the one word Intellection covers two distinct
 Acts?
 
 Rather there is primal Intellection and there is Intellection
 deriving from the Primal and of other scope.
 
 As speech is the echo of the thought in the Soul, so thought in
 the Soul is an echo from elsewhere: that is to say, as the uttered
 thought is an image of the soul-thought, so the soul-thought images
 a thought above itself and is the interpreter of the higher sphere.
 
 Virtue, in the same way, is a thing of the Soul: it does not
 belong to the Intellectual-Principle or to the Transcendence.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. We come, so, to the question whether Purification is the
 whole of this human quality, virtue, or merely the forerunner upon
 which virtue follows? Does virtue imply the achieved state of
 purification or does the mere process suffice to it, Virtue being
 something of less perfection than the accomplished pureness which is
 almost the Term?
 
 To have been purified is to have cleansed away everything alien:
 but Goodness is something more.
 
 If before the impurity entered there was Goodness, the Goodness
 suffices; but even so, not the act of cleansing but the 
 cleansed thing
 that emerges will be The Good. And it remains to establish what this
 emergent is.
 
 It can scarcely prove to be The Good: The Absolute Good cannot
 be thought to have taken up its abode with Evil. We can think of it
 only as something of the nature of good but paying a double 
 allegiance
 and unable to rest in the Authentic Good.
 
 The Soul's true Good is in devotion to the 
 Intellectual-Principle,
 its kin; evil to the Soul lies in frequenting strangers. There is no
 other way for it than to purify itself and so enter into 
 relation with
 its own; the new phase begins by a new orientation.
 
 After the Purification, then, there is still this orientation to
 be made? No: by the purification the true alignment stands
 accomplished.
 
 The Soul's virtue, then, is this alignment? No: it is what the
 alignment brings about within.
 
 And this is...?
 
 That it sees; that, like sight affected by the thing seen, the
 soul admits the imprint, graven upon it and working within it, of
 the vision it has come to.
 
 But was not the Soul possessed of all this always, or had it
 forgotten?
 
 What it now sees, it certainly always possessed, but as 
 lying away
 in the dark, not as acting within it: to dispel the 
 darkness, and thus
 come to knowledge of its inner content, it must thrust towards the
 light.
 
 Besides, it possessed not the originals but images, pictures;
 and these it must bring into closer accord with the verities they
 represent. And, further, if the Intellectual-Principle is 
 said to be a
 possession of the Soul, this is only in the sense that It is 
 not alien
 and that the link becomes very close when the Soul's sight is turned
 towards It: otherwise, ever-present though It be, It remains
 foreign, just as our knowledge, if it does not determine action, is
 dead to us.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. So we come to the scope of the purification: that understood,
 the nature of Likeness becomes clear. Likeness to what Principle?
 Identity with what God?
 
 The question is substantially this: how far does purification
 dispel the two orders of passion- anger, desire and the like, with
 grief and its kin- and in what degree the disengagement from the
 body is possible.
 
 Disengagement means simply that the soul withdraws to its own
 place.
 
 It will hold itself above all passions and affections. Necessary
 pleasures and all the activity of the senses it will employ only for
 medicament and assuagement lest its work be impeded. Pain it may
 combat, but, failing the cure, it will bear meekly and ease it by
 refusing assent to it. All passionate action it will check: the
 suppression will be complete if that be possible, but at worst the
 Soul will never itself take fire but will keep the involuntary and
 uncontrolled outside its precincts and rare and weak at 
 that. The Soul
 has nothing to dread, though no doubt the involuntary has some power
 here too: fear therefore must cease, except so far as it is purely
 monitory. What desire there may be can never be for the 
 vile; even the
 food and drink necessary for restoration will lie outside of the
 Soul's attention, and not less the sexual appetite: or if such
 desire there must be, it will turn upon the actual needs of 
 the nature
 and be entirely under control; or if any uncontrolled motion takes
 place, it will reach no further than the imagination, be no more
 than a fleeting fancy.
 
 The Soul itself will be inviolately free and will be working to
 set the irrational part of the nature above all attack, or 
 if that may
 not be, then at least to preserve it from violent assault, 
 so that any
 wound it takes may be slight and be healed at once by virtue of the
 Soul's presence, just as a man living next door to a Sage 
 would profit
 by the neighbourhood, either in becoming wise and good 
 himself or, for
 sheer shame, never venturing any act which the nobler mind would
 disapprove.
 
 There will be no battling in the Soul: the mere intervention of
 Reason is enough: the lower nature will stand in such awe of Reason
 that for any slightest movement it has made it will grieve, and
 censure its own weakness, in not having kept low and still in the
 presence of its lord.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. In all this there is no sin- there is only matter of
 discipline- but our concern is not merely to be sinless but 
 to be God.
 
 As long as there is any such involuntary action, the nature is
 twofold, God and Demi-God, or rather God in association with a
 nature of a lower power: when all the involuntary is 
 suppressed, there
 is God unmingled, a Divine Being of those that follow upon The First.
 
 For, at this height, the man is the very being that came from
 the Supreme. The primal excellence restored, the essential man is
 There: entering this sphere, he has associated himself with the
 reasoning phase of his nature and this he will lead up into likeness
 with his highest self, as far as earthly mind is capable, so that if
 possible it shall never be inclined to, and at the least never
 adopt, any course displeasing to its overlord.
 
 What form, then, does virtue take in one so lofty?
 
 It appears as Wisdom, which consists in the contemplation of all
 that exists in the Intellectual-Principle, and as the immediate
 presence of the Intellectual-Principle itself.
 
 And each of these has two modes or aspects: there is Wisdom as
 it is in the Intellectual-Principle and as in the Soul; and there is
 the Intellectual-Principle as it is present to itself and as it is
 present to the Soul: this gives what in the Soul is Virtue, in the
 Supreme not Virtue.
 
 In the Supreme, then, what is it?
 
 Its proper Act and Its Essence.
 
 That Act and Essence of the Supreme, manifested in a new form,
 constitute the virtue of this sphere. For the Supreme is not
 self-existent justice, or the Absolute of any defined virtue: it is,
 so to speak, an exemplar, the source of what in the soul becomes
 virtue: for virtue is dependent, seated in something not itself; the
 Supreme is self-standing, independent.
 
 But taking Rectitude to be the due ordering of faculty, does it
 not always imply the existence of diverse parts?
 
 No: There is a Rectitude of Diversity appropriate to what has
 parts, but there is another, not less Rectitude than the 
 former though
 it resides in a Unity. And the authentic Absolute-Rectitude 
 is the Act
 of a Unity upon itself, of a Unity in which there is no this and
 that and the other.
 
 On this principle, the supreme Rectitude of the Soul is that it
 direct its Act towards the Intellectual-Principle: its Restraint
 (Sophrosyne) is its inward bending towards the 
 Intellectual-Principle;
 its Fortitude is its being impassive in the likeness of That towards
 which its gaze is set, Whose nature comports an impassivity which
 the Soul acquires by virtue and must acquire if it is not to 
 be at the
 mercy of every state arising in its less noble companion.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. The virtues in the Soul run in a sequence 
 correspondent to that
 existing in the over-world, that is among their exemplars in the
 Intellectual-Principle.
 
 In the Supreme, Intellection constitutes Knowledge and Wisdom;
 self-concentration is Sophrosyne; Its proper Act is Its Dutifulness;
 Its Immateriality, by which It remains inviolate within Itself is
 the equivalent of Fortitude.
 
 In the Soul, the direction of vision towards the
 Intellectual-Principle is Wisdom and Prudence, soul-virtues not
 appropriate to the Supreme where Thinker and Thought are identical.
 All the other virtues have similar correspondences.
 
 And if the term of purification is the production of a 
 pure being,
 then the purification of the Soul must produce all the 
 virtues; if any
 are lacking, then not one of them is perfect.
 
 And to possess the greater is potentially to possess the minor,
 though the minor need not carry the greater with them.
 
 Thus we have indicated the dominant note in the life of the
 Sage; but whether his possession of the minor virtues be actual as
 well as potential, whether even the greater are in Act in 
 him or yield
 to qualities higher still, must be decided afresh in each several
 case.
 
 Take, for example, Contemplative-Wisdom. If other guides of
 conduct must be called in to meet a given need, can this virtue hold
 its ground even in mere potentiality?
 
 And what happens when the virtues in their very nature differ in
 scope and province? Where, for example, Sophrosyne would 
 allow certain
 acts or emotions under due restraint and another virtue 
 would cut them
 off altogether? And is it not clear that all may have to yield, once
 Contemplative-Wisdom comes into action?
 
 The solution is in understanding the virtues and what each has
 to give: thus the man will learn to work with this or that as every
 several need demands. And as he reaches to loftier principles and
 other standards these in turn will define his conduct: for example,
 Restraint in its earlier form will no longer satisfy him; he 
 will work
 for the final Disengagement; he will live, no longer, the human life
 of the good man- such as Civic Virtue commends- but, leaving this
 beneath him, will take up instead another life, that of the Gods.
 
 For it is to the Gods, not to the Good, that our Likeness must
 look: to model ourselves upon good men is to produce an image of an
 image: we have to fix our gaze above the image and attain Likeness
 to the Supreme Exemplar.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THIRD TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON DIALECTIC [THE UPWARD WAY].
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. What art is there, what method, what discipline to bring us
 there where we must go?
 
 The Term at which we must arrive we may take as agreed: we have
 established elsewhere, by many considerations, that our journey is
 to the Good, to the Primal-Principle; and, indeed, the very
 reasoning which discovered the Term was itself something like an
 initiation.
 
 But what order of beings will attain the Term?
 
 Surely, as we read, those that have already seen all or most
 things, those who at their first birth have entered into the 
 life-germ
 from which is to spring a metaphysician, a musician or a born lover,
 the metaphysician taking to the path by instinct, the 
 musician and the
 nature peculiarly susceptible to love needing outside guidance.
 
 But how lies the course? Is it alike for all, or is there a
 distinct method for each class of temperament?
 
 For all there are two stages of the path, as they are making
 upwards or have already gained the upper sphere.
 
 The first degree is the conversion from the lower life; the
 second- held by those that have already made their way to the sphere
 of the Intelligibles, have set as it were a footprint there but must
 still advance within the realm- lasts until they reach the extreme
 hold of the place, the Term attained when the topmost peak of the
 Intellectual realm is won.
 
 But this highest degree must bide its time: let us first try to
 speak of the initial process of conversion.
 
 We must begin by distinguishing the three types. Let us take the
 musician first and indicate his temperamental equipment for the task.
 
 The musician we may think of as being exceedingly quick 
 to beauty,
 drawn in a very rapture to it: somewhat slow to stir of his own
 impulse, he answers at once to the outer stimulus: as the timid are
 sensitive to noise so he to tones and the beauty they 
 convey; all that
 offends against unison or harmony in melodies and rhythms repels
 him; he longs for measure and shapely pattern.
 
 This natural tendency must be made the starting-point to such a
 man; he must be drawn by the tone, rhythm and design in things of
 sense: he must learn to distinguish the material forms from the
 Authentic-Existent which is the source of all these correspondences
 and of the entire reasoned scheme in the work of art: he must be led
 to the Beauty that manifests itself through these forms; he must be
 shown that what ravished him was no other than the Harmony of the
 Intellectual world and the Beauty in that sphere, not some one shape
 of beauty but the All-Beauty, the Absolute Beauty; and the truths of
 philosophy must be implanted in him to lead him to faith in that
 which, unknowing it, he possesses within himself. What these truths
 are we will show later.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. The born lover, to whose degree the musician also may attain-
 and then either come to a stand or pass beyond- has a certain memory
 of beauty but, severed from it now, he no longer comprehends it:
 spellbound by visible loveliness he clings amazed about that. His
 lesson must be to fall down no longer in bewildered delight before
 some, one embodied form; he must be led, under a system of mental
 discipline, to beauty everywhere and made to discern the One 
 Principle
 underlying all, a Principle apart from the material forms, springing
 from another source, and elsewhere more truly present. The 
 beauty, for
 example, in a noble course of life and in an admirably organized
 social system may be pointed out to him- a first training this in
 the loveliness of the immaterial- he must learn to recognise the
 beauty in the arts, sciences, virtues; then these severed and
 particular forms must be brought under the one principle by the
 explanation of their origin. From the virtues he is to be led to the
 Intellectual-Principle, to the Authentic-Existent; thence onward, he
 treads the upward way.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. The metaphysician, equipped by that very character, winged
 already and not like those others, in need of disengagement,
 stirring of himself towards the supernal but doubting of the way,
 needs only a guide. He must be shown, then, and instructed, a
 willing wayfarer by his very temperament, all but self-directed.
 
 Mathematics, which as a student by nature he will take very
 easily, will be prescribed to train him to abstract thought and to
 faith in the unembodied; a moral being by native disposition, he
 must be led to make his virtue perfect; after the Mathematics he
 must be put through a course in Dialectic and made an adept in the
 science.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. But this science, this Dialectic essential to all the three
 classes alike, what, in sum, is it?
 
 It is the Method, or Discipline, that brings with it the power
 of pronouncing with final truth upon the nature and relation of
 things- what each is, how it differs from others, what common
 quality all have, to what Kind each belongs and in what rank each
 stands in its Kind and whether its Being is Real-Being, and how many
 Beings there are, and how many non-Beings to be distinguished from
 Beings.
 
 Dialectic treats also of the Good and the not-Good, and of the
 particulars that fall under each, and of what is the Eternal and
 what the not Eternal- and of these, it must be understood, not by
 seeming-knowledge ["sense-knowledge"] but with authentic science.
 
 All this accomplished, it gives up its touring of the realm of
 sense and settles down in the Intellectual Kosmos and there plies
 its own peculiar Act: it has abandoned all the realm of deceit and
 falsity, and pastures the Soul in the "Meadows of Truth": it employs
 the Platonic division to the discernment of the Ideal-Forms, of the
 Authentic-Existence and of the First-Kinds [or Categories of Being]:
 it establishes, in the light of Intellection, the unity there is in
 all that issues from these Firsts, until it has traversed the entire
 Intellectual Realm: then, resolving the unity into the particulars
 once more, it returns to the point from which it starts.
 
 Now rests: instructed and satisfied as to the Being in that
 sphere, it is no longer busy about many things: it has arrived at
 Unity and it contemplates: it leaves to another science all that
 coil of premisses and conclusions called the art of 
 reasoning, much as
 it leaves the art of writing: some of the matter of logic, no doubt,
 it considers necessary- to clear the ground- but it makes itself the
 judge, here as in everything else; where it sees use, it uses;
 anything it finds superfluous, it leaves to whatever department of
 learning or practice may turn that matter to account.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. But whence does this science derive its own initial laws?
 
 The Intellectual-Principle furnishes standards, the most certain
 for any soul that is able to apply them. What else is necessary,
 Dialectic puts together for itself, combining and dividing, until it
 has reached perfect Intellection. "For," we read, "it is the purest
 [perfection] of Intellection and Contemplative-Wisdom." And, 
 being the
 noblest method and science that exists it must needs deal with
 Authentic-Existence, The Highest there is: as 
 Contemplative-Wisdom [or
 true-knowing] it deals with Being, as Intellection with what
 transcends Being.
 
 What, then, is Philosophy?
 
 Philosophy is the supremely precious.
 
 Is Dialectic, then, the same as Philosophy?
 
 It is the precious part of Philosophy. We must not think of it
 as the mere tool of the metaphysician: Dialectic does not consist of
 bare theories and rules: it deals with verities; Existences 
 are, as it
 were, Matter to it, or at least it proceeds methodically towards
 Existences, and possesses itself, at the one step, of the notions
 and of the realities.
 
 Untruth and sophism it knows, not directly, not of its 
 own nature,
 but merely as something produced outside itself, something which it
 recognises to be foreign to the verities laid up in itself; in the
 falsity presented to it, it perceives a clash with its own canon of
 truth. Dialectic, that is to say, has no knowledge of propositions-
 collections of words- but it knows the truth, and, in that
 knowledge, knows what the schools call their propositions: it knows
 above all, the operation of the soul, and, by virtue of this
 knowing, it knows, too, what is affirmed and what is denied, whether
 the denial is of what was asserted or of something else, and whether
 propositions agree or differ; all that is submitted to it, it
 attacks with the directness of sense-perception and it leaves petty
 precisions of process to what other science may care for such
 exercises.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. Philosophy has other provinces, but Dialectic is its precious
 part: in its study of the laws of the universe, Philosophy draws on
 Dialectic much as other studies and crafts use Arithmetic, though,
 of course, the alliance between Philosophy and Dialectic is closer.
 
 And in Morals, too, Philosophy uses Dialectic: by Dialectic it
 comes to contemplation, though it originates of itself the 
 moral state
 or rather the discipline from which the moral state develops.
 
 Our reasoning faculties employ the data of Dialectic almost as
 their proper possession for they are mainly concerned about Matter
 [whose place and worth Dialectic establishes].
 
 And while the other virtues bring the reason to bear upon
 particular experiences and acts, the virtue of Wisdom [i.e., the
 virtue peculiarly induced by Dialectic] is a certain super-reasoning
 much closer to the Universal; for it deals with correspondence and
 sequence, the choice of time for action and inaction, the adoption
 of this course, the rejection of that other: Wisdom and 
 Dialectic have
 the task of presenting all things as Universals and stripped 
 of matter
 for treatment by the Understanding.
 
 But can these inferior kinds of virtue exist without 
 Dialectic and
 philosophy?
 
 Yes- but imperfectly, inadequately.
 
 And is it possible to be a Sage, Master in Dialectic, without
 these lower virtues?
 
 It would not happen: the lower will spring either before or
 together with the higher. And it is likely that everyone normally
 possesses the natural virtues from which, when Wisdom steps in, the
 perfected virtue develops. After the natural virtues, then, Wisdom
 and, so the perfecting of the moral nature. Once the natural virtues
 exist, both orders, the natural and the higher, ripen side by side
 to their final excellence: or as the one advances it carries forward
 the other towards perfection.
 
 But, ever, the natural virtue is imperfect in vision and in
 strength- and to both orders of virtue the essential matter is from
 what principles we derive them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FOURTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON TRUE HAPPINESS.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Are we to make True Happiness one and the same thing with
 Welfare or Prosperity and therefore within the reach of the other
 living beings as well as ourselves?
 
 There is certainly no reason to deny well-being to any of them
 as long as their lot allows them to flourish unhindered after their
 kind.
 
 Whether we make Welfare consist in pleasant conditions 
 of life, or
 in the accomplishment of some appropriate task, by either account it
 may fall to them as to us. For certainly they may at once be
 pleasantly placed and engaged about some function that lies in their
 nature: take for an instance such living beings as have the gift of
 music; finding themselves well-off in other ways, they sing, too, as
 their nature is, and so their day is pleasant to them.
 
 And if, even, we set Happiness in some ultimate Term pursued by
 inborn tendency, then on this head, too, we must allow it to animals
 from the moment of their attaining this Ultimate: the nature in them
 comes to a halt, having fulfilled its vital course from a 
 beginning to
 an end.
 
 It may be a distasteful notion, this bringing-down of 
 happiness so
 low as to the animal world- making it over, as then we must, even to
 the vilest of them and not withholding it even from the 
 plants, living
 they too and having a life unfolding to a Term.
 
 But, to begin with, it is surely unsound to deny that 
 good of life
 to animals only because they do not appear to man to be of great
 account. And as for plants, we need not necessarily allow to 
 them what
 we accord to the other forms of life, since they have no feeling. It
 is true people might be found to declare prosperity possible to the
 very plants: they have life, and life may bring good or evil; the
 plants may thrive or wither, bear or be barren.
 
 No: if Pleasure be the Term, if here be the good of life, it is
 impossible to deny the good of life to any order of living things;
 if the Term be inner-peace, equally impossible; impossible, too, if
 the good of life be to live in accordance with the purpose of nature.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Those that deny the happy life to the plants on the 
 ground that
 they lack sensation are really denying it to all living things.
 
 By sensation can be meant only perception of state, and the
 state of well-being must be Good in itself quite apart from the
 perception: to be a part of the natural plan is good whether 
 knowingly
 or without knowledge: there is good in the appropriate state even
 though there be no recognition of its fitness or desirable quality-
 for it must be in itself desirable.
 
 This Good exists, then; is present: that in which it is present
 has well-being without more ado: what need then to ask for sensation
 into the bargain?
 
 Perhaps, however, the theory is that the good of any state
 consists not in the condition itself but in the knowledge and
 perception of it.
 
 But at this rate the Good is nothing but the mere sensation, the
 bare activity of the sentient life. And so it will be 
 possessed by all
 that feel, no matter what. Perhaps it will be said that two
 constituents are needed to make up the Good, that there must be both
 feeling and a given state felt: but how can it be maintained that
 the bringing together of two neutrals can produce the Good?
 
 They will explain, possibly, that the state must be a state of
 Good and that such a condition constitutes well-being on the
 discernment of that present good; but then they invite the question
 whether the well-being comes by discerning the presence of the Good
 that is there, or whether there must further be the double 
 recognition
 that the state is agreeable and that the agreeable state constitutes
 the Good.
 
 If well-being demands this recognition, it depends no longer
 upon sensation but upon another, a higher faculty; and well-being is
 vested not in a faculty receptive of pleasure but in one competent
 to discern that pleasure is the Good.
 
 Then the cause of the well-being is no longer pleasure but the
 faculty competent to pronounce as to pleasure's value. Now a judging
 entity is nobler than one that merely accepts a state: it is a
 principle of Reason or of Intellection: pleasure is a state: the
 reasonless can never be closer to the Good than reason is. How can
 reason abdicate and declare nearer to good than itself 
 something lying
 in a contrary order?
 
 No: those denying the good of life to the vegetable world, and
 those that make it consist in some precise quality of sensation, are
 in reality seeking a loftier well-being than they are aware of, and
 setting their highest in a more luminous phase of life.
 
 Perhaps, then, those are in the right who found happiness not on
 the bare living or even on sensitive life but on the life of Reason?
 
 But they must tell us it should be thus restricted and why
 precisely they make Reason an essential to the happiness in a living
 being:
 
 "When you insist on Reason, is it because Reason is resourceful,
 swift to discern and compass the primal needs of nature; or would
 you demand it, even though it were powerless in that domain?"
 
 If you call it in as a provider, then the reasonless, 
 equally with
 the reasoning, may possess happiness after their kind, as long as,
 without any thought of theirs, nature supplies their wants: Reason
 becomes a servant; there is no longer any worth in it for itself and
 no worth in that consummation of reason which, we hold, is virtue.
 
 If you say that reason is to be cherished for its own 
 sake and not
 as supplying these human needs, you must tell us what other services
 it renders, what is its proper nature and what makes it the perfect
 thing it is.
 
 For, on this admission, its perfection cannot reside in any such
 planning and providing: its perfection will be something quite
 different, something of quite another class: Reason cannot be itself
 one of those first needs of nature; it cannot even be a 
 cause of those
 first needs of nature or at all belong to that order: it must be
 nobler than any and all of such things: otherwise it is not easy to
 see how we can be asked to rate it so highly.
 
 Until these people light upon some nobler principle than any at
 which they still halt, they must be left where they are and 
 where they
 choose to be, never understanding what the Good of Life is to those
 that can make it theirs, never knowing to what kind of beings it is
 accessible.
 
 What then is happiness? Let us try basing it upon Life.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Now if we draw no distinction as to kinds of life, everything
 that lives will be capable of happiness, and those will be 
 effectively
 happy who possess that one common gift of which every living thing
 is by nature receptive. We could not deny it to the irrational
 whilst allowing it to the rational. If happiness were inherent in
 the bare being-alive, the common ground in which the cause of
 happiness could always take root would be simply life.
 
 Those, then, that set happiness not in the mere living but in
 the reasoning life seem to overlook the fact that they are not
 really making it depend upon life at all: they admit that this
 reasoning faculty, round which they centre happiness, is a property
 [not the subject of a property]: the subject, to them, must be the
 Reasoning-Life since it is in this double term that they find the
 basis of the happiness: so that they are making it consist 
 not in life
 but in a particular kind of life- not, of course, a species formally
 opposite but, in terminology, standing as an "earlier" to a 
 "later" in
 the one Kind.
 
 Now in common use this word "Life" embraces many forms 
 which shade
 down from primal to secondary and so on, all massed under the common
 term- life of plant and life of animal- each phase brighter or
 dimmer than its next: and so it evidently must be with the
 Good-of-Life. And if thing is ever the image of thing, so every Good
 must always be the image of a higher Good.
 
 If mere Being is insufficient, if happiness demands fulness of
 life, and exists, therefore, where nothing is lacking of all that
 belongs to the idea of life, then happiness can exist only in a
 being that lives fully.
 
 And such a one will possess not merely the good, but the Supreme
 Good if, that is to say, in the realm of existents the Supreme Good
 can be no other than the authentically living, no other than Life in
 its greatest plenitude, life in which the good is present as 
 something
 essential not as something brought from without, a life needing no
 foreign substance called in from a foreign realm, to establish it in
 good.
 
 For what could be added to the fullest life to make it the best
 life? If anyone should answer, "The nature of Good" [The Good, as a
 Divine Hypostasis], the reply would certainly be near our 
 thought, but
 we are not seeking the Cause but the main constituent.
 
 It has been said more than once that the perfect life 
 and the true
 life, the essential life, is in the Intellectual Nature beyond this
 sphere, and that all other forms of life are incomplete, are
 phantoms of life, imperfect, not pure, not more truly life than they
 are its contrary: here let it be said succinctly that since 
 all living
 things proceed from the one principle but possess life in different
 degrees, this principle must be the first life and the most complete.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. If, then, the perfect life is within human reach, the man
 attaining it attains happiness: if not, happiness must be 
 made over to
 the gods, for the perfect life is for them alone.
 
 But since we hold that happiness is for human beings too, we
 must consider what this perfect life is. The matter may be stated
 thus:
 
 It has been shown elsewhere that man, when he commands not
 merely the life of sensation but also Reason and Authentic
 Intellection, has realised the perfect life.
 
 But are we to picture this kind of life as something foreign
 imported into his nature?
 
 No: there exists no single human being that does not either
 potentially or effectively possess this thing which we hold to
 constitute happiness.
 
 But are we to think of man as including this form of life, the
 perfect, after the manner of a partial constituent of his entire
 nature?
 
 We say, rather, that while in some men it is present as a mere
 portion of their total being- in those, namely, that have it
 potentially- there is, too, the man, already in possession of true
 felicity, who is this perfection realized, who has passed over into
 actual identification with it. All else is now mere clothing 
 about the
 man, not to be called part of him since it lies about him unsought,
 not his because not appropriated to himself by any act of the will.
 
 To the man in this state, what is the Good?
 
 He himself by what he has and is.
 
 And the author and principle of what he is and holds is the
 Supreme, which within Itself is the Good but manifests Itself within
 the human being after this other mode.
 
 The sign that this state has been achieved is that the man seeks
 nothing else.
 
 What indeed could he be seeking? Certainly none of the 
 less worthy
 things; and the Best he carries always within him.
 
 He that has such a life as this has all he needs in life.
 
 Once the man is a Sage, the means of happiness, the way to good,
 are within, for nothing is good that lies outside him. Anything he
 desires further than this he seeks as a necessity, and not 
 for himself
 but for a subordinate, for the body bound to him, to which since it
 has life he must minister the needs of life, not needs, however, to
 the true man of this degree. He knows himself to stand above all
 such things, and what he gives to the lower he so gives as to leave
 his true life undiminished.
 
 Adverse fortune does not shake his felicity: the life so founded
 is stable ever. Suppose death strikes at his household or at his
 friends; he knows what death is, as the victims, if they are 
 among the
 wise, know too. And if death taking from him his familiars and
 intimates does bring grief, it is not to him, not to the 
 true man, but
 to that in him which stands apart from the Supreme, to that lower
 man in whose distress he takes no part.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. But what of sorrows, illnesses and all else that inhibit the
 native activity?
 
 What of the suspension of consciousness which drugs or 
 disease may
 bring about? Could either welfare or happiness be present under such
 conditions? And this is to say nothing of misery and disgrace, which
 will certainly be urged against us, with undoubtedly also those
 never-failing "Miseries of Priam."
 
 "The Sage," we shall be told, "may bear such afflictions and
 even take them lightly but they could never be his choice, and the
 happy life must be one that would be chosen. The Sage, that 
 is, cannot
 be thought of as simply a sage soul, no count being taken of the
 bodily-principle in the total of the being: he will, no doubt, take
 all bravely... until the body's appeals come up before him, and
 longings and loathings penetrate through the body to the inner man.
 And since pleasure must be counted in towards the happy life, how
 can one that, thus, knows the misery of ill-fortune or pain be
 happy, however sage he be? Such a state, of bliss self-contained, is
 for the Gods; men, because of the less noble part subjoined in them,
 must needs seek happiness throughout all their being and not 
 merely in
 some one part; if the one constituent be troubled, the other,
 answering to its associate's distress, must perforce suffer
 hindrance in its own activity. There is nothing but to cut away the
 body or the body's sensitive life and so secure that self-contained
 unity essential to happiness."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. Now if happiness did indeed require freedom from pain,
 sickness, misfortune, disaster, it would be utterly denied to anyone
 confronted by such trials: but if it lies in the fruition of the
 Authentic Good, why turn away from this Term and look to means,
 imagining that to be happy a man must need a variety of 
 things none of
 which enter into happiness? If, in fact, felicity were made up by
 heaping together all that is at once desirable and necessary we must
 bid for these also. But if the Term must be one and not many; if in
 other words our quest is of a Term and not of Terms; that only can
 be elected which is ultimate and noblest, that which calls to the
 tenderest longings of the soul.
 
 The quest and will of the Soul are not pointed directly towards
 freedom from this sphere: the reason which disciplines away our
 concern about this life has no fundamental quarrel with 
 things of this
 order; it merely resents their interference; sometimes, even, it
 must seek them; essentially all the aspiration is not so much away
 from evil as towards the Soul's own highest and noblest: this
 attained, all is won and there is rest- and this is the veritably
 willed state of life.
 
 There can be no such thing as "willing" the acquirement of
 necessaries, if Will is to be taken in its strict sense, and not
 misapplied to the mere recognition of need.
 
 It is certain that we shrink from the unpleasant, and such
 shrinking is assuredly not what we should have willed; to have no
 occasion for any such shrinking would be much nearer to our 
 taste; but
 the things we seek tell the story as soon as they are ours. For
 instance, health and freedom from pain; which of these has any great
 charm? As long as we possess them, we set no store upon them.
 
 Anything which, present, has no charm and adds nothing to
 happiness, which when lacking is desired because of the 
 presence of an
 annoying opposite, may reasonably be called a necessity but not a
 Good.
 
 Such things can never make part of our final object: our 
 Term must
 be such that though these pleasanter conditions be absent and their
 contraries present, it shall remain, still, intact.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Then why are these conditions sought and their contraries
 repelled by the man established in happiness?
 
 Here is our answer:
 
 These more pleasant conditions cannot, it is true, add any
 particle towards the Sage's felicity: but they do serve towards the
 integrity of his being, while the presence of the contraries tends
 against his Being or complicates the Term: it is not that 
 the Sage can
 be so easily deprived of the Term achieved but simply that he that
 holds the highest good desires to have that alone, not something
 else at the same time, something which, though it cannot banish the
 Good by its incoming, does yet take place by its side.
 
 In any case if the man that has attained felicity meets some
 turn of fortune that he would not have chosen, there is not the
 slightest lessening of his happiness for that. If there were, his
 felicity would be veering or falling from day to day; the death of a
 child would bring him down, or the loss of some trivial possession.
 No: a thousand mischances and disappointments may befall him 
 and leave
 him still in the tranquil possession of the Term.
 
 But, they cry, great disasters, not the petty daily chances!
 
 What human thing, then, is great, so as not to be despised by
 one who has mounted above all we know here, and is bound now 
 no longer
 to anything below?
 
 If the Sage thinks all fortunate events, however momentous, to
 be no great matter- kingdom and the rule over cities and peoples,
 colonisations and the founding of states, even though all be his own
 handiwork- how can he take any great account of the vacillations of
 power or the ruin of his fatherland? Certainly if he thought any
 such event a great disaster, or any disaster at all, he must be of a
 very strange way of thinking. One that sets great store by wood and
 stones, or... Zeus... by mortality among mortals cannot yet be the
 Sage, whose estimate of death, we hold, must be that it is 
 better than
 life in the body.
 
 But suppose that he himself is offered a victim in sacrifice?
 
 Can he think it an evil to die beside the altars?
 
 But if he go unburied?
 
 Wheresoever it lie, under earth or over earth, his body will
 always rot.
 
 But if he has been hidden away, not with costly ceremony 
 but in an
 unnamed grave, not counted worthy of a towering monument?
 
 The littleness of it!
 
 But if he falls into his enemies' hands, into prison?
 
 There is always the way towards escape, if none towards
 well-being.
 
 But if his nearest be taken from him, his sons and daughters
 dragged away to captivity?
 
 What then, we ask, if he had died without witnessing the wrong?
 Could he have quitted the world in the calm conviction that 
 nothing of
 all this could happen? He must be very shallow. Can he fail to see
 that it is possible for such calamities to overtake his 
 household, and
 does he cease to be a happy man for the knowledge of what may occur?
 In the knowledge of the possibility he may be at ease; so, too, when
 the evil has come about.
 
 He would reflect that the nature of this All is such as brings
 these things to pass and man must bow the head.
 
 Besides in many cases captivity will certainly prove an 
 advantage;
 and those that suffer have their freedom in their hands: if 
 they stay,
 either there is reason in their staying, and then they have no real
 grievance, or they stay against reason, when they should 
 not, and then
 they have themselves to blame. Clearly the absurdities of his
 neighbours, however near, cannot plunge the Sage into evil: his
 state cannot hang upon the fortunes good or bad of any other men.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. As for violent personal sufferings, he will carry them off as
 well as he can; if they overpass his endurance they will carry him
 off.
 
 And so in all his pain he asks no pity: there is always the
 radiance in the inner soul of the man, untroubled like the light in
 a lantern when fierce gusts beat about it in a wild turmoil of wind
 and tempest.
 
 But what if he be put beyond himself? What if pain grow 
 so intense
 and so torture him that the agony all but kills? Well, when he is
 put to torture he will plan what is to be done: he retains 
 his freedom
 of action.
 
 Besides we must remember that the Sage sees things very
 differently from the average man; neither ordinary experiences nor
 pains and sorrows, whether touching himself or others, pierce to the
 inner hold. To allow them any such passage would be a weakness in
 our soul.
 
 And it is a sign of weakness, too, if we should think it gain
 not to hear of miseries, gain to die before they come: this is not
 concern for others' welfare but for our own peace of mind. 
 Here we see
 our imperfection: we must not indulge it, we must put it from us and
 cease to tremble over what perhaps may be.
 
 Anyone that says that it is in human nature to grieve over
 misfortune to our household must learn that this is not so with all,
 and that, precisely, it is virtue's use to raise the general level
 of nature towards the better and finer, above the mass of 
 men. And the
 finer is to set at nought what terrifies the common mind.
 
 We cannot be indolent: this is an arena for the powerful 
 combatant
 holding his ground against the blows of fortune, and knowing that,
 sore though they be to some natures, they are little to his, nothing
 dreadful, nursery terrors.
 
 So, the Sage would have desired misfortune?
 
 It is precisely to meet the undesired when it appears that he
 has the virtue which gives him, to confront it, his passionless and
 unshakeable soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. But when he is out of himself, reason quenched by sickness or
 by magic arts?
 
 If it be allowed that in this state, resting as it were in a
 slumber, he remains a Sage, why should he not equally remain 
 happy? No
 one rules him out of felicity in the hours of sleep; no one counts
 up that time and so denies that he has been happy all his life.
 
 If they say that, failing consciousness, he is no longer 
 the Sage,
 then they are no longer reasoning about the Sage: but we do suppose
 a Sage, and are enquiring whether, as long as he is the 
 Sage, he is in
 the state of felicity.
 
 "Well, a Sage let him remain," they say, "still, having no
 sensation and not expressing his virtue in act, how can he be happy?"
 
 But a man unconscious of his health may be, none the less,
 healthy: a man may not be aware of his personal attraction, but he
 remains handsome none the less: if he has no sense of his wisdom,
 shall he be any the less wise?
 
 It may perhaps be urged that sensation and consciousness are
 essential to wisdom and that happiness is only wisdom brought to act.
 
 Now, this argument might have weight if prudence, wisdom, were
 something fetched in from outside: but this is not so: wisdom is, in
 its essential nature, an Authentic-Existence, or rather is The
 Authentic-Existent- and this Existent does not perish in one asleep
 or, to take the particular case presented to us, in the man 
 out of his
 mind: the Act of this Existent is continuous within him; and is a
 sleepless activity: the Sage, therefore, even unconscious, is still
 the Sage in Act.
 
 This activity is screened not from the man entire but merely
 from one part of him: we have here a parallel to what happens in the
 activity of the physical or vegetative life in us which is not made
 known by the sensitive faculty to the rest of the man: if 
 our physical
 life really constituted the "We," its Act would be our Act: but, in
 the fact, this physical life is not the "We"; the "We" is 
 the activity
 of the Intellectual-Principle so that when the Intellective is in
 Act we are in Act.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. Perhaps the reason this continuous activity remains
 unperceived is that it has no touch whatever with things of sense.
 No doubt action upon material things, or action dictated by 
 them, must
 proceed through the sensitive faculty which exists for that use: but
 why should there not be an immediate activity of the
 Intellectual-Principle and of the soul that attends it, the soul
 that antedates sensation or any perception? For, if Intellection and
 Authentic-Existence are identical, this "Earlier-than-perception" 
 must
 be a thing having Act.
 
 Let us explain the conditions under which we become conscious of
 this Intellective-Act.
 
 When the Intellect is in upward orientation that [lower part of
 it] which contains [or, corresponds to] the life of the Soul, is, so
 to speak, flung down again and becomes like the reflection resting
 on the smooth and shining surface of a mirror; in this illustration,
 when the mirror is in place the image appears but, though the mirror
 be absent or out of gear, all that would have acted and produced an
 image still exists; so in the case of the Soul; when there 
 is peace in
 that within us which is capable of reflecting the images of the
 Rational and Intellectual-Principles these images appear. Then, side
 by side with the primal knowledge of the activity of the Rational
 and the Intellectual-Principles, we have also as it were a
 sense-perception of their operation.
 
 When, on the contrary, the mirror within is shattered 
 through some
 disturbance of the harmony of the body, Reason and the
 Intellectual-Principle act unpictured: Intellection is unattended by
 imagination.
 
 In sum we may safely gather that while the 
 Intellective-Act may be
 attended by the Imaging Principle, it is not to be 
 confounded with it.
 
 And even in our conscious life we can point to many noble
 activities, of mind and of hand alike, which at the time in no way
 compel our consciousness. A reader will often be quite unconscious
 when he is most intent: in a feat of courage there can be no sense
 either of the brave action or of the fact that all that is done
 conforms to the rules of courage. And so in cases beyond number.
 
 So that it would even seem that consciousness tends to blunt the
 activities upon which it is exercised, and that in the 
 degree in which
 these pass unobserved they are purer and have more effect, more
 vitality, and that, consequently, the Sage arrived at this state has
 the truer fulness of life, life not spilled out in sensation but
 gathered closely within itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. We shall perhaps be told that in such a state the man is no
 longer alive: we answer that these people show themselves equally
 unable to understand his inner life and his happiness.
 
 If this does not satisfy them, we must ask them to keep in mind
 a living Sage and, under these terms, to enquire whether the 
 man is in
 happiness: they must not whittle away his life and then ask 
 whether he
 has the happy life; they must not take away man and then look for
 the happiness of a man: once they allow that the Sage lives within,
 they must not seek him among the outer activities, still less look
 to the outer world for the object of his desires. To consider the
 outer world to be a field to his desire, to fancy the Sage desiring
 any good external, would be to deny Substantial-Existence to
 happiness; for the Sage would like to see all men prosperous and no
 evil befalling anyone; but though it prove otherwise, he is still
 content.
 
 If it be admitted that such a desire would be against reason,
 since evil cannot cease to be, there is no escape from agreeing with
 us that the Sage's will is set always and only inward.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. The pleasure demanded for the life cannot be in the 
 enjoyments
 of the licentious or in any gratifications of the body- there is no
 place for these, and they stifle happiness- nor in any violent
 emotions- what could so move the Sage?- it can be only such pleasure
 as there must be where Good is, pleasure that does not rise from
 movement and is not a thing of process, for all that is good is
 immediately present to the Sage and the Sage is present to himself:
 his pleasure, his contentment, stands, immovable.
 
 Thus he is ever cheerful, the order of his life ever untroubled:
 his state is fixedly happy and nothing whatever of all that is known
 as evil can set it awry- given only that he is and remains a Sage.
 
 If anyone seeks for some other kind of pleasure in the 
 life of the
 Sage, it is not the life of the Sage he is looking for.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. The characteristic activities are not hindered by 
 outer events
 but merely adapt themselves, remaining always fine, and perhaps all
 the finer for dealing with the actual. When he has to handle
 particular cases and things, he may not be able to put his 
 vision into
 act without searching and thinking, but the one greatest principle
 is ever present to him, like a part of his being- most of 
 all present,
 should he be even a victim in the much-talked-of Bull of Phalaris.
 No doubt, despite all that has been said, it is idle to pretend that
 this is an agreeable lodging; but what cries in the Bull is the
 thing that feels the torture; in the Sage there is something else as
 well, The Self-Gathered which, as long as it holds itself by main
 force within itself, can never be robbed of the vision of the
 All-Good.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. For man, and especially the Sage, is not the Couplement of
 soul and body: the proof is that man can be disengaged from the body
 and disdain its nominal goods.
 
 It would be absurd to think that happiness begins and ends with
 the living-body: happiness is the possession of the good of life: it
 is centred therefore in Soul, is an Act of the Soul- and not of all
 the Soul at that: for it certainly is not characteristic of the
 vegetative soul, the soul of growth; that would at once connect it
 with the body.
 
 A powerful frame, a healthy constitution, even a happy balance
 of temperament, these surely do not make felicity; in the excess of
 these advantages there is, even, the danger that the man be crushed
 down and forced more and more within their power. There must 
 be a sort
 of counter-pressure in the other direction, towards the noblest: the
 body must be lessened, reduced, that the veritable man may 
 show forth,
 the man behind the appearances.
 
 Let the earth-bound man be handsome and powerful and rich, and
 so apt to this world that he may rule the entire human race: still
 there can be no envying him, the fool of such lures. Perhaps such
 splendours could not, from the beginning even, have gathered to the
 Sage; but if it should happen so, he of his own action will lower
 his state, if he has any care for his true life; the tyranny of the
 body he will work down or wear away by inattention to its claims;
 the rulership he will lay aside. While he will safeguard his bodily
 health, he will not wish to be wholly untried in sickness, still
 less never to feel pain: if such troubles should not come to him of
 themselves, he will wish to know them, during youth at least: in old
 age, it is true, he will desire neither pains nor pleasures to
 hamper him; he will desire nothing of this world, pleasant 
 or painful;
 his one desire will be to know nothing of the body. If he should
 meet with pain he will pit against it the powers he holds to meet
 it; but pleasure and health and ease of life will not mean any
 increase of happiness to him nor will their contraries destroy or
 lessen it.
 
 When in the one subject, a positive can add nothing, how can the
 negative take away?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. But suppose two wise men, one of them possessing all that is
 supposed to be naturally welcome, while the other meets only with
 the very reverse: do we assert that they have an equal happiness?
 
 We do, if they are equally wise.
 
 What though the one be favoured in body and in all else that
 does not help towards wisdom, still less towards virtue, towards the
 vision of the noblest, towards being the highest, what does all that
 amount to? The man commanding all such practical advantages cannot
 flatter himself that he is more truly happy than the man 
 without them:
 the utmost profusion of such boons would not help even to make a
 flute-player.
 
 We discuss the happy man after our own feebleness; we count
 alarming and grave what his felicity takes lightly: he would be
 neither wise nor in the state of happiness if he had not quitted all
 trifling with such things and become as it were another being,
 having confidence in his own nature, faith that evil can never touch
 him. In such a spirit he can be fearless through and through; where
 there is dread, there is not perfect virtue; the man is some 
 sort of a
 half-thing.
 
 As for any involuntary fear rising in him and taking the 
 judgement
 by surprise, while his thoughts perhaps are elsewhere, the Sage will
 attack it and drive it out; he will, so to speak, calm the refractory
 child within him, whether by reason or by menace, but 
 without passion,
 as an infant might feel itself rebuked by a glance of severity.
 
 This does not make the Sage unfriendly or harsh: it is to
 himself and in his own great concern that he is the Sage: giving
 freely to his intimates of all he has to give, he will be the best
 of friends by his very union with the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. Those that refuse to place the Sage aloft in the
 Intellectual Realm but drag him down to the accidental, dreading
 accident for him, have substituted for the Sage we have in mind
 another person altogether; they offer us a tolerable sort of man and
 they assign to him a life of mingled good and ill, a case, after
 all, not easy to conceive. But admitting the possibility of such a
 mixed state, it could not be deserved to be called a life of
 happiness; it misses the Great, both in the dignity of Wisdom and in
 the integrity of Good. The life of true happiness is not a thing of
 mixture. And Plato rightly taught that he who is to be wise and to
 possess happiness draws his good from the Supreme, fixing his gaze
 on That, becoming like to That, living by That.
 
 He can care for no other Term than That: all else he will attend
 to only as he might change his residence, not in expectation of any
 increase to his settled felicity, but simply in a reasonable 
 attention
 to the differing conditions surrounding him as he lives here 
 or there.
 
 He will give to the body all that he sees to be useful and
 possible, but he himself remains a member of another order, not
 prevented from abandoning the body, necessarily leaving it 
 at nature's
 hour, he himself always the master to decide in its regard.
 
 Thus some part of his life considers exclusively the Soul's
 satisfaction; the rest is not immediately for the Term's sake and
 not for his own sake, but for the thing bound up with him, the thing
 which he tends and bears with as the musician cares for his lyre, as
 long as it can serve him: when the lyre fails him, he will change
 it, or will give up lyre and lyring, as having another craft now,
 one that needs no lyre, and then he will let it rest 
 unregarded at his
 side while he sings on without an instrument. But it was not 
 idly that
 the instrument was given him in the beginning: he has found it
 useful until now, many a time.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIFTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 HAPPINESS AND EXTENSION OF TIME.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Is it possible to think that Happiness increases with Time,
 Happiness which is always taken as a present thing?
 
 The memory of former felicity may surely be ruled out of count,
 for Happiness is not a thing of words, but a definite condition
 which must be actually present like the very fact and act of life.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. It may be objected that our will towards living and towards
 expressive activity is constant, and that each attainment of such
 expression is an increase in Happiness.
 
 But in the first place, by this reckoning every to-morrow's
 well-being will be greater than to-day's, every later instalment
 successively larger that an earlier; at once time supplants moral
 excellence as the measure of felicity.
 
 Then again the Gods to-day must be happier than of old: and
 their bliss, too, is not perfect, will never be perfect. 
 Further, when
 the will attains what it was seeking, it attains something present:
 the quest is always for something to be actually present until a
 standing felicity is definitely achieved. The will to life which is
 will to Existence aims at something present, since Existence 
 must be a
 stably present thing. Even when the act of the will is directed
 towards the future, and the furthest future, its object is 
 an actually
 present having and being: there is no concern about what is passed
 or to come: the future state a man seeks is to be a now to him; he
 does not care about the forever: he asks that an actual present be
 actually present.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Yes, but if the well-being has lasted a long time, if that
 present spectacle has been a longer time before the eyes?
 
 If in the greater length of time the man has seen more deeply,
 time has certainly done something for him, but if all the process
 has brought him no further vision, then one glance would give all he
 has had.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. Still the one life has known pleasure longer than the other?
 
 But pleasure cannot be fairly reckoned in with Happiness- unless
 indeed by pleasure is meant the unhindered Act [of the true man], in
 which case this pleasure is simply our "Happiness." And even 
 pleasure,
 though it exist continuously, has never anything but the present;
 its past is over and done with.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. We are asked to believe, then, it will be objected, 
 that if one
 man has been happy from first to last, another only at the 
 last, and a
 third, beginning with happiness, has lost it, their shares are equal?
 
 This is straying from the question: we were comparing the happy
 among themselves: now we are asked to compare the not-happy at the
 time when they are out of happiness with those in actual 
 possession of
 happiness. If these last are better off, they are so as men in
 possession of happiness against men without it and their advantage
 is always by something in the present.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. Well, but take the unhappy man: must not increase of 
 time bring
 an increase of his unhappiness? Do not all troubles- long-lasting
 pains, sorrows, and everything of that type- yield a greater sum of
 misery in the longer time? And if thus in misery the evil is 
 augmented
 by time why should not time equally augment happiness when all is
 well?
 
 In the matter of sorrows and pains there is, no doubt, ground
 for saying that time brings increase: for example, in a lingering
 malady the evil hardens into a state, and as time goes on the body
 is brought lower and lower. But if the constitution did not
 deteriorate, if the mischief grew no worse, then, here too, there
 would be no trouble but that of the present moment: we 
 cannot tell the
 past into the tale of unhappiness except in the sense that 
 it has gone
 to make up an actually existing state- in the sense that, the evil
 in the sufferer's condition having been extended over a longer time,
 the mischief has gained ground. The increase of ill-being then is
 due to the aggravation of the malady not to the extension of time.
 
 It may be pointed out also that this greater length of 
 time is not
 a thing existent at any given moment; and surely a "more" is 
 not to be
 made out by adding to something actually present something that has
 passed away.
 
 No: true happiness is not vague and fluid: it is an unchanging
 state.
 
 If there is in this matter any increase besides that of 
 mere time,
 it is in the sense that a greater happiness is the reward of a
 higher virtue: this is not counting up to the credit of happiness
 the years of its continuance; it is simply noting the high-water
 mark once for all attained.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. But if we are to consider only the present and may not call
 in the past to make the total, why do we not reckon so in the case
 of time itself, where, in fact, we do not hesitate to add the past
 to the present and call the total greater? Why not suppose a
 quantity of happiness equivalent to a quantity of time? This would
 be no more than taking it lap by lap to correspond with time-laps
 instead of choosing to consider it as an indivisible, measurable
 only by the content of a given instant.
 
 There is no absurdity in taking count of time which has ceased
 to be: we are merely counting what is past and finished, as we might
 count the dead: but to treat past happiness as actually existent and
 as outweighing present happiness, that is an absurdity. For
 Happiness must be an achieved and existent state, whereas any time
 over and apart from the present is nonexistent: all progress of time
 means the extinction of all the time that has been.
 
 Hence time is aptly described as a mimic of eternity 
 that seeks to
 break up in its fragmentary flight the permanence of its exemplar.
 Thus whatever time seizes and seals to itself of what stands 
 permanent
 in eternity is annihilated- saved only in so far as in some degree
 it still belongs to eternity, but wholly destroyed if it be
 unreservedly absorbed into time.
 
 If Happiness demands the possession of the good of life, it
 clearly has to do with the life of Authentic-Existence for that life
 is the Best. Now the life of Authentic-Existence is measurable not
 by time but by eternity; and eternity is not a more or a less or a
 thing of any magnitude but is the unchangeable, the indivisible, is
 timeless Being.
 
 We must not muddle together Being and Non-Being, time and
 eternity, not even everlasting time with the eternal; we cannot make
 laps and stages of an absolute unity; all must be taken together,
 wheresoever and howsoever we handle it; and it must be taken at
 that, not even as an undivided block of time but as the Life of
 Eternity, a stretch not made up of periods but completely rounded,
 outside of all notion of time.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. It may be urged that the actual presence of past experiences,
 kept present by Memory, gives the advantage to the man of the longer
 felicity.
 
 But, Memory of what sort of experiences?
 
 Memory either of formerly attained wisdom and virtue- in which
 case we have a better man and the argument from memory is 
 given up- or
 memory of past pleasures, as if the man that has arrived at felicity
 must roam far and wide in search of gratifications and is not
 contented by the bliss actually within him.
 
 And what is there pleasant in the memory of pleasure? What is it
 to recall yesterday's excellent dinner? Still more ridiculous, one
 of ten years ago. So, too, of last year's morality.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. But is there not something to be said for the memory of the
 various forms of beauty?
 
 That is the resource of a man whose life is without beauty in
 the present, so that, for lack of it now, he grasps at the memory of
 what has been.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. But, it may be said, length of time produces an abundance of
 good actions missed by the man whose attainment of the happy state
 is recent- if indeed we can think at all of a state of 
 happiness where
 good actions have been few.
 
 Now to make multiplicity, whether in time or in action,
 essential to Happiness is to put it together by combining
 non-existents, represented by the past, with some one thing that
 actually is. This consideration it was that led us at the very
 beginning to place Happiness in the actually existent and on that
 basis to launch our enquiry as to whether the higher degree was
 determined by the longer time. It might be thought that the
 Happiness of longer date must surpass the shorter by virtue of the
 greater number of acts it included.
 
 But, to begin with, men quite outside of the active life may
 attain the state of felicity, and not in a less but in a greater
 degree than men of affairs.
 
 Secondly, the good does not derive from the act itself but from
 the inner disposition which prompts the noble conduct: the wise and
 good man in his very action harvests the good not by what he does
 but by what he is.
 
 A wicked man no less than a Sage may save the country, and the
 good of the act is for all alike, no matter whose was the 
 saving hand.
 The contentment of the Sage does not hang upon such actions and
 events: it is his own inner habit that creates at once his felicity
 and whatever pleasure may accompany it.
 
 To put Happiness in actions is to put it in things that are
 outside virtue and outside the Soul; for the Soul's expression is
 not in action but in wisdom, in a contemplative operation within
 itself; and this, this alone, is Happiness.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SIXTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 BEAUTY.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Beauty addresses itself chiefly to sight; but there 
 is a beauty
 for the hearing too, as in certain combinations of words and in all
 kinds of music, for melodies and cadences are beautiful; and minds
 that lift themselves above the realm of sense to a higher order are
 aware of beauty in the conduct of life, in actions, in character, in
 the pursuits of the intellect; and there is the beauty of 
 the virtues.
 What loftier beauty there may be, yet, our argument will bring to
 light.
 
 What, then, is it that gives comeliness to material forms and
 draws the ear to the sweetness perceived in sounds, and what is the
 secret of the beauty there is in all that derives from Soul?
 
 Is there some One Principle from which all take their 
 grace, or is
 there a beauty peculiar to the embodied and another for the
 bodiless? Finally, one or many, what would such a Principle be?
 
 Consider that some things, material shapes for instance, are
 gracious not by anything inherent but by something 
 communicated, while
 others are lovely of themselves, as, for example, Virtue.
 
 The same bodies appear sometimes beautiful, sometimes 
 not; so that
 there is a good deal between being body and being beautiful.
 
 What, then, is this something that shows itself in certain
 material forms? This is the natural beginning of our enquiry.
 
 What is it that attracts the eyes of those to whom a beautiful
 object is presented, and calls them, lures them, towards it, 
 and fills
 them with joy at the sight? If we possess ourselves of this, we have
 at once a standpoint for the wider survey.
 
 Almost everyone declares that the symmetry of parts towards each
 other and towards a whole, with, besides, a certain charm of colour,
 constitutes the beauty recognized by the eye, that in visible
 things, as indeed in all else, universally, the beautiful thing is
 essentially symmetrical, patterned.
 
 But think what this means.
 
 Only a compound can be beautiful, never anything devoid of
 parts; and only a whole; the several parts will have beauty, not in
 themselves, but only as working together to give a comely total. Yet
 beauty in an aggregate demands beauty in details; it cannot be
 constructed out of ugliness; its law must run throughout.
 
 All the loveliness of colour and even the light of the sun,
 being devoid of parts and so not beautiful by symmetry, must be
 ruled out of the realm of beauty. And how comes gold to be a 
 beautiful
 thing? And lightning by night, and the stars, why are these so fair?
 
 In sounds also the simple must be proscribed, though often in a
 whole noble composition each several tone is delicious in itself.
 
 Again since the one face, constant in symmetry, appears
 sometimes fair and sometimes not, can we doubt that beauty is
 something more than symmetry, that symmetry itself owes its beauty
 to a remoter principle?
 
 Turn to what is attractive in methods of life or in the 
 expression
 of thought; are we to call in symmetry here? What symmetry is to be
 found in noble conduct, or excellent laws, in any form of mental
 pursuit?
 
 What symmetry can there be in points of abstract thought?
 
 The symmetry of being accordant with each other? But there may
 be accordance or entire identity where there is nothing but
 ugliness: the proposition that honesty is merely a generous
 artlessness chimes in the most perfect harmony with the proposition
 that morality means weakness of will; the accordance is complete.
 
 Then again, all the virtues are a beauty of the soul, a beauty
 authentic beyond any of these others; but how does symmetry enter
 here? The soul, it is true, is not a simple unity, but still its
 virtue cannot have the symmetry of size or of number: what 
 standard of
 measurement could preside over the compromise or the coalescence of
 the soul's faculties or purposes?
 
 Finally, how by this theory would there be beauty in the
 Intellectual-Principle, essentially the solitary?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Let us, then, go back to the source, and indicate at once the
 Principle that bestows beauty on material things.
 
 Undoubtedly this Principle exists; it is something that is
 perceived at the first glance, something which the soul names as
 from an ancient knowledge and, recognising, welcomes it, enters into
 unison with it.
 
 But let the soul fall in with the Ugly and at once it shrinks
 within itself, denies the thing, turns away from it, not accordant,
 resenting it.
 
 Our interpretation is that the soul- by the very truth of its
 nature, by its affiliation to the noblest Existents in the hierarchy
 of Being- when it sees anything of that kin, or any trace of that
 kinship, thrills with an immediate delight, takes its own to itself,
 and thus stirs anew to the sense of its nature and of all its
 affinity.
 
 But, is there any such likeness between the loveliness of this
 world and the splendours in the Supreme? Such a likeness in the
 particulars would make the two orders alike: but what is there in
 common between beauty here and beauty There?
 
 We hold that all the loveliness of this world comes by communion
 in Ideal-Form.
 
 All shapelessness whose kind admits of pattern and form, as long
 as it remains outside of Reason and Idea, is ugly by that very
 isolation from the Divine-Thought. And this is the Absolute Ugly: an
 ugly thing is something that has not been entirely mastered by
 pattern, that is by Reason, the Matter not yielding at all points
 and in all respects to Ideal-Form.
 
 But where the Ideal-Form has entered, it has grouped and
 coordinated what from a diversity of parts was to become a unity: it
 has rallied confusion into co-operation: it has made the sum one
 harmonious coherence: for the Idea is a unity and what it moulds
 must come to unity as far as multiplicity may.
 
 And on what has thus been compacted to unity, Beauty enthrones
 itself, giving itself to the parts as to the sum: when it lights on
 some natural unity, a thing of like parts, then it gives itself to
 that whole. Thus, for an illustration, there is the beauty,
 conferred by craftsmanship, of all a house with all its 
 parts, and the
 beauty which some natural quality may give to a single stone.
 
 This, then, is how the material thing becomes beautiful- by
 communicating in the thought that flows from the Divine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. And the soul includes a faculty peculiarly addressed 
 to Beauty-
 one incomparably sure in the appreciation of its own, never in doubt
 whenever any lovely thing presents itself for judgement.
 
 Or perhaps the soul itself acts immediately, affirming the
 Beautiful where it finds something accordant with the Ideal-Form
 within itself, using this Idea as a canon of accuracy in its 
 decision.
 
 But what accordance is there between the material and that which
 antedates all Matter?
 
 On what principle does the architect, when he finds the house
 standing before him correspondent with his inner ideal of a house,
 pronounce it beautiful? Is it not that the house before him, the
 stones apart, is the inner idea stamped upon the mass of exterior
 matter, the indivisible exhibited in diversity?
 
 So with the perceptive faculty: discerning in certain objects
 the Ideal-Form which has bound and controlled shapeless matter,
 opposed in nature to Idea, seeing further stamped upon the common
 shapes some shape excellent above the common, it gathers into unity
 what still remains fragmentary, catches it up and carries it within,
 no longer a thing of parts, and presents it to the Ideal-Principle
 as something concordant and congenial, a natural friend: the joy
 here is like that of a good man who discerns in a youth the early
 signs of a virtue consonant with the achieved perfection within his
 own soul.
 
 The beauty of colour is also the outcome of a unification: it
 derives from shape, from the conquest of the darkness inherent in
 Matter by the pouring-in of light, the unembodied, which is a
 Rational-Principle and an Ideal-Form.
 
 Hence it is that Fire itself is splendid beyond all material
 bodies, holding the rank of Ideal-Principle to the other elements,
 making ever upwards, the subtlest and sprightliest of all bodies, as
 very near to the unembodied; itself alone admitting no other, all
 the others penetrated by it: for they take warmth but this is never
 cold; it has colour primally; they receive the Form of 
 colour from it:
 hence the splendour of its light, the splendour that belongs to the
 Idea. And all that has resisted and is but uncertainly held by its
 light remains outside of beauty, as not having absorbed the
 plenitude of the Form of colour.
 
 And harmonies unheard in sound create the harmonies we hear, and
 wake the soul to the consciousness of beauty, showing it the one
 essence in another kind: for the measures of our sensible music are
 not arbitrary but are determined by the Principle whose labour is to
 dominate Matter and bring pattern into being.
 
 Thus far of the beauties of the realm of sense, images and
 shadow-pictures, fugitives that have entered into Matter- to adorn,
 and to ravish, where they are seen.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. But there are earlier and loftier beauties than these. In the
 sense-bound life we are no longer granted to know them, but the
 soul, taking no help from the organs, sees and proclaims them. To
 the vision of these we must mount, leaving sense to its own 
 low place.
 
 As it is not for those to speak of the graceful forms of the
 material world who have never seen them or known their 
 grace- men born
 blind, let us suppose- in the same way those must be silent upon the
 beauty of noble conduct and of learning and all that order who have
 never cared for such things, nor may those tell of the splendour of
 virtue who have never known the face of Justice and of Moral-Wisdom
 beautiful beyond the beauty of Evening and of dawn.
 
 Such vision is for those only who see with the Soul's sight- and
 at the vision, they will rejoice, and awe will fall upon them and a
 trouble deeper than all the rest could ever stir, for now they are
 moving in the realm of Truth.
 
 This is the spirit that Beauty must ever induce, wonderment and
 a delicious trouble, longing and love and a trembling that is all
 delight. For the unseen all this may be felt as for the 
 seen; and this
 the Souls feel for it, every soul in some degree, but those the more
 deeply that are the more truly apt to this higher love- just as all
 take delight in the beauty of the body but all are not stung as
 sharply, and those only that feel the keener wound are known as
 Lovers.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. These Lovers, then, lovers of the beauty outside of 
 sense, must
 be made to declare themselves.
 
 What do you feel in presence of the grace you discern in
 actions, in manners, in sound morality, in all the works and 
 fruits of
 virtue, in the beauty of souls? When you see that you yourselves are
 beautiful within, what do you feel? What is this Dionysiac
 exultation that thrills through your being, this straining upwards
 of all your Soul, this longing to break away from the body and live
 sunken within the veritable self?
 
 These are no other than the emotions of Souls under the spell of
 love.
 
 But what is it that awakens all this passion? No shape, 
 no colour,
 no grandeur of mass: all is for a Soul, something whose beauty rests
 upon no colour, for the moral wisdom the Soul enshrines and all the
 other hueless splendour of the virtues. It is that you find in
 yourself, or admire in another, loftiness of spirit; righteousness
 of life; disciplined purity; courage of the majestic face; gravity;
 modesty that goes fearless and tranquil and passionless; and,
 shining down upon all, the light of god-like Intellection.
 
 All these noble qualities are to be reverenced and loved, no
 doubt, but what entitles them to be called beautiful?
 
 They exist: they manifest themselves to us: anyone that sees
 them must admit that they have reality of Being; and is not
 Real-Being, really beautiful?
 
 But we have not yet shown by what property in them they have
 wrought the Soul to loveliness: what is this grace, this splendour
 as of Light, resting upon all the virtues?
 
 Let us take the contrary, the ugliness of the Soul, and set that
 against its beauty: to understand, at once, what this ugliness is
 and how it comes to appear in the Soul will certainly open our way
 before us.
 
 Let us then suppose an ugly Soul, dissolute, unrighteous:
 teeming with all the lusts; torn by internal discord; beset by the
 fears of its cowardice and the envies of its pettiness; thinking, in
 the little thought it has, only of the perish able and the base;
 perverse in all its the friend of unclean pleasures; living the life
 of abandonment to bodily sensation and delighting in its deformity.
 
 What must we think but that all this shame is something that has
 gathered about the Soul, some foreign bane outraging it, soiling it,
 so that, encumbered with all manner of turpitude, it has no longer a
 clean activity or a clean sensation, but commands only a life
 smouldering dully under the crust of evil; that, sunk in manifold
 death, it no longer sees what a Soul should see, may no 
 longer rest in
 its own being, dragged ever as it is towards the outer, the 
 lower, the
 dark?
 
 An unclean thing, I dare to say; flickering hither and thither
 at the call of objects of sense, deeply infected with the taint of
 body, occupied always in Matter, and absorbing Matter into itself;
 in its commerce with the Ignoble it has trafficked away for an alien
 nature its own essential Idea.
 
 If a man has been immersed in filth or daubed with mud his
 native comeliness disappears and all that is seen is the foul stuff
 besmearing him: his ugly condition is due to alien matter that has
 encrusted him, and if he is to win back his grace it must be his
 business to scour and purify himself and make himself what he was.
 
 So, we may justly say, a Soul becomes ugly- by something foisted
 upon it, by sinking itself into the alien, by a fall, a descent into
 body, into Matter. The dishonour of the Soul is in its ceasing to be
 clean and apart. Gold is degraded when it is mixed with earthy
 particles; if these be worked out, the gold is left and is
 beautiful, isolated from all that is foreign, gold with gold alone.
 And so the Soul; let it be but cleared of the desires that 
 come by its
 too intimate converse with the body, emancipated from all the
 passions, purged of all that embodiment has thrust upon it, 
 withdrawn,
 a solitary, to itself again- in that moment the ugliness that came
 only from the alien is stripped away.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. For, as the ancient teaching was, moral-discipline and
 courage and every virtue, not even excepting Wisdom itself, all is
 purification.
 
 Hence the Mysteries with good reason adumbrate the immersion of
 the unpurified in filth, even in the Nether-World, since the unclean
 loves filth for its very filthiness, and swine foul of body 
 find their
 joy in foulness.
 
 What else is Sophrosyne, rightly so-called, but to take 
 no part in
 the pleasures of the body, to break away from them as unclean and
 unworthy of the clean? So too, Courage is but being fearless of the
 death which is but the parting of the Soul from the body, an event
 which no one can dread whose delight is to be his unmingled self.
 And Magnanimity is but disregard for the lure of things here. And
 Wisdom is but the Act of the Intellectual-Principle 
 withdrawn from the
 lower places and leading the Soul to the Above.
 
 The Soul thus cleansed is all Idea and Reason, wholly free of
 body, intellective, entirely of that divine order from which the
 wellspring of Beauty rises and all the race of Beauty.
 
 Hence the Soul heightened to the Intellectual-Principle is
 beautiful to all its power. For Intellection and all that proceeds
 from Intellection are the Soul's beauty, a graciousness native to it
 and not foreign, for only with these is it truly Soul. And it is
 just to say that in the Soul's becoming a good and beautiful thing
 is its becoming like to God, for from the Divine comes all the
 Beauty and all the Good in beings.
 
 We may even say that Beauty is the Authentic-Existents and
 Ugliness is the Principle contrary to Existence: and the Ugly is
 also the primal evil; therefore its contrary is at once good and
 beautiful, or is Good and Beauty: and hence the one method will
 discover to us the Beauty-Good and the Ugliness-Evil.
 
 And Beauty, this Beauty which is also The Good, must be posed as
 The First: directly deriving from this First is the
 Intellectual-Principle which is pre-eminently the manifestation of
 Beauty; through the Intellectual-Principle Soul is beautiful. The
 beauty in things of a lower order-actions and pursuits for instance-
 comes by operation of the shaping Soul which is also the 
 author of the
 beauty found in the world of sense. For the Soul, a divine thing, a
 fragment as it were of the Primal Beauty, makes beautiful to the
 fulness of their capacity all things whatsoever that it grasps and
 moulds.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Therefore we must ascend again towards the Good, the 
 desired of
 every Soul. Anyone that has seen This, knows what I intend when I
 say that it is beautiful. Even the desire of it is to be desired as
 a Good. To attain it is for those that will take the upward path,
 who will set all their forces towards it, who will divest themselves
 of all that we have put on in our descent:- so, to those 
 that approach
 the Holy Celebrations of the Mysteries, there are appointed
 purifications and the laying aside of the garments worn before, and
 the entry in nakedness- until, passing, on the upward way, 
 all that is
 other than the God, each in the solitude of himself shall behold
 that solitary-dwelling Existence, the Apart, the Unmingled, the
 Pure, that from Which all things depend, for Which all look and live
 and act and know, the Source of Life and of Intellection and 
 of Being.
 
 And one that shall know this vision- with what passion of love
 shall he not be seized, with what pang of desire, what longing to be
 molten into one with This, what wondering delight! If he that has
 never seen this Being must hunger for It as for all his welfare, he
 that has known must love and reverence It as the very Beauty; he
 will be flooded with awe and gladness, stricken by a salutary
 terror; he loves with a veritable love, with sharp desire; all other
 loves than this he must despise, and disdain all that once seemed
 fair.
 
 This, indeed, is the mood even of those who, having witnessed
 the manifestation of Gods or Supernals, can never again feel the old
 delight in the comeliness of material forms: what then are 
 we to think
 of one that contemplates Absolute Beauty in Its essential integrity,
 no accumulation of flesh and matter, no dweller on earth or in the
 heavens- so perfect Its purity- far above all such things in 
 that they
 are non-essential, composite, not primal but descending from This?
 
 Beholding this Being- the Choragos of all Existence, the
 Self-Intent that ever gives forth and never takes- resting, rapt, in
 the vision and possession of so lofty a loveliness, growing to Its
 likeness, what Beauty can the soul yet lack? For This, the Beauty
 supreme, the absolute, and the primal, fashions Its lovers to Beauty
 and makes them also worthy of love.
 
 And for This, the sternest and the uttermost combat is set
 before the Souls; all our labour is for This, lest we be left
 without part in this noblest vision, which to attain is to be
 blessed in the blissful sight, which to fail of is to fail utterly.
 
 For not he that has failed of the joy that is in colour or in
 visible forms, not he that has failed of power or of honours or of
 kingdom has failed, but only he that has failed of only This, for
 Whose winning he should renounce kingdoms and command over earth and
 ocean and sky, if only, spurning the world of sense from beneath his
 feet, and straining to This, he may see.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. But what must we do? How lies the path? How come to vision of
 the inaccessible Beauty, dwelling as if in consecrated precincts,
 apart from the common ways where all may see, even the profane?
 
 He that has the strength, let him arise and withdraw 
 into himself,
 foregoing all that is known by the eyes, turning away for ever from
 the material beauty that once made his joy. When he perceives those
 shapes of grace that show in body, let him not pursue: he must know
 them for copies, vestiges, shadows, and hasten away towards That
 they tell of. For if anyone follow what is like a beautiful shape
 playing over water- is there not a myth telling in symbol of such a
 dupe, how he sank into the depths of the current and was 
 swept away to
 nothingness? So too, one that is held by material beauty and will
 not break free shall be precipitated, not in body but in 
 Soul, down to
 the dark depths loathed of the Intellective-Being, where, blind even
 in the Lower-World, he shall have commerce only with 
 shadows, there as
 here.
 
 "Let us flee then to the beloved Fatherland": this is 
 the soundest
 counsel. But what is this flight? How are we to gain the 
 open sea? For
 Odysseus is surely a parable to us when he commands the flight from
 the sorceries of Circe or Calypso- not content to linger for all the
 pleasure offered to his eyes and all the delight of sense filling
 his days.
 
 The Fatherland to us is There whence we have come, and There is
 The Father.
 
 What then is our course, what the manner of our flight? This is
 not a journey for the feet; the feet bring us only from land to
 land; nor need you think of coach or ship to carry you away; all
 this order of things you must set aside and refuse to see: you must
 close the eyes and call instead upon another vision which is to be
 waked within you, a vision, the birth-right of all, which few turn
 to use.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. And this inner vision, what is its operation?
 
 Newly awakened it is all too feeble to bear the ultimate
 splendour. Therefore the Soul must be trained- to the habit of
 remarking, first, all noble pursuits, then the works of beauty
 produced not by the labour of the arts but by the virtue of men
 known for their goodness: lastly, you must search the souls of those
 that have shaped these beautiful forms.
 
 But how are you to see into a virtuous soul and know its
 loveliness?
 
 Withdraw into yourself and look. And if you do not find yourself
 beautiful yet, act as does the creator of a statue that is to be
 made beautiful: he cuts away here, he smoothes there, he makes this
 line lighter, this other purer, until a lovely face has 
 grown upon his
 work. So do you also: cut away all that is excessive, straighten all
 that is crooked, bring light to all that is overcast, labour to make
 all one glow of beauty and never cease chiselling your statue, until
 there shall shine out on you from it the godlike splendour of
 virtue, until you shall see the perfect goodness surely 
 established in
 the stainless shrine.
 
 When you know that you have become this perfect work, 
 when you are
 self-gathered in the purity of your being, nothing now remaining
 that can shatter that inner unity, nothing from without clinging to
 the authentic man, when you find yourself wholly true to your
 essential nature, wholly that only veritable Light which is not
 measured by space, not narrowed to any circumscribed form nor again
 diffused as a thing void of term, but ever unmeasurable as something
 greater than all measure and more than all quantity- when 
 you perceive
 that you have grown to this, you are now become very vision: now
 call up all your confidence, strike forward yet a step- you need a
 guide no longer- strain, and see.
 
 This is the only eye that sees the mighty Beauty. If the eye
 that adventures the vision be dimmed by vice, impure, or weak, and
 unable in its cowardly blenching to see the uttermost 
 brightness, then
 it sees nothing even though another point to what lies plain to
 sight before it. To any vision must be brought an eye adapted to
 what is to be seen, and having some likeness to it. Never did eye
 see the sun unless it had first become sunlike, and never 
 can the soul
 have vision of the First Beauty unless itself be beautiful.
 
 Therefore, first let each become godlike and each beautiful who
 cares to see God and Beauty. So, mounting, the Soul will 
 come first to
 the Intellectual-Principle and survey all the beautiful Ideas in the
 Supreme and will avow that this is Beauty, that the Ideas are
 Beauty. For by their efficacy comes all Beauty else, but the 
 offspring
 and essence of the Intellectual-Being. What is beyond the
 Intellectual-Principle we affirm to be the nature of Good radiating
 Beauty before it. So that, treating the Intellectual-Kosmos as one,
 the first is the Beautiful: if we make distinction there, 
 the Realm of
 Ideas constitutes the Beauty of the Intellectual Sphere; and 
 The Good,
 which lies beyond, is the Fountain at once and Principle of Beauty:
 the Primal Good and the Primal Beauty have the one 
 dwelling-place and,
 thus, always, Beauty's seat is There.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SEVENTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON THE PRIMAL GOOD AND SECONDARY FORMS OF GOOD
 
 [OTHERWISE, "ON HAPPINESS"].
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. We can scarcely conceive that for any entity the Good can be
 other than the natural Act expressing its life-force, or in the case
 of an entity made up of parts the Act, appropriate, natural and
 complete, expressive of that in it which is best.
 
 For the Soul, then, the Good is its own natural Act.
 
 But the Soul itself is natively a "Best"; if, further, its act
 be directed towards the Best, the achievement is not merely the
 "Soul's good" but "The Good" without qualification.
 
 Now, given an Existent which- as being itself the best of
 existences and even transcending the existences- directs its Act
 towards no other, but is the object to which the Act of all else is
 directed, it is clear that this must be at once the Good and 
 the means
 through which all else may participate in Good.
 
 This Absolute Good other entities may possess in two ways- by
 becoming like to It and by directing the Act of their being towards
 It.
 
 Now, if all aspiration and Act whatsoever are directed 
 towards the
 Good, it follows that the Essential-Good neither need nor can look
 outside itself or aspire to anything other than itself: it can but
 remain unmoved, as being, in the constitution of things, the
 wellspring and firstcause of all Act: whatsoever in other entities
 is of the nature of Good cannot be due to any Act of the
 Essential-Good upon them; it is for them on the contrary to act
 towards their source and cause. The Good must, then, be the Good not
 by any Act, not even by virtue of its Intellection, but by its very
 rest within Itself.
 
 Existing beyond and above Being, it must be beyond and above the
 Intellectual-Principle and all Intellection.
 
 For, again, that only can be named the Good to which all is
 bound and itself to none: for only thus is it veritably the object
 of all aspiration. It must be unmoved, while all circles 
 around it, as
 a circumference around a centre from which all the radii proceed.
 Another example would be the sun, central to the light which streams
 from it and is yet linked to it, or at least is always about it,
 irremoveably; try all you will to separate the light from the sun,
 or the sun from its light, for ever the light is in the sun.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. But the Universe outside; how is it aligned towards the Good?
 
 The soulless by direction toward Soul: Soul towards the Good
 itself, through the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 Everything has something of the Good, by virtue of possessing a
 certain degree of unity and a certain degree of Existence and by
 participation in Ideal-Form: to the extent of the Unity, Being, and
 Form which are present, there is a sharing in an image, for the
 Unity and Existence in which there is participation are no more than
 images of the Ideal-Form.
 
 With Soul it is different; the First-Soul, that which 
 follows upon
 the Intellectual-Principle, possesses a life nearer to the Verity
 and through that Principle is of the nature of good; it will
 actually possess the Good if it orientate itself towards the
 Intellectual-Principle, since this follows immediately upon the Good.
 
 In sum, then, life is the Good to the living, and the
 Intellectual-Principle to what is intellective; so that 
 where there is
 life with intellection there is a double contact with the Good.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. But if life is a good, is there good for all that lives?
 
 No: in the vile, life limps: it is like the eye to the
 dim-sighted; it fails of its task.
 
 But if the mingled strand of life is to us, though entwined with
 evil, still in the total a good, must not death be an evil?
 
 Evil to What? There must be a subject for the evil: but if the
 possible subject is no longer among beings, or, still among 
 beings, is
 devoid of life... why, a stone is not more immune.
 
 If, on the contrary, after death life and soul continue, then
 death will be no evil but a good; Soul, disembodied, is the freer to
 ply its own Act.
 
 If it be taken into the All-Soul- what evil can reach it There?
 And as the Gods are possessed of Good and untouched by evil- so,
 certainly is the Soul that has preserved its essential character.
 And if it should lose its purity, the evil it experiences is not in
 its death but in its life. Suppose it to be under punishment in the
 lower world, even there the evil thing is its life and not its
 death; the misfortune is still life, a life of a definite character.
 
 Life is a partnership of a Soul and body; death is the
 dissolution; in either life or death, then, the Soul will feel
 itself at home.
 
 But, again, if life is good, how can death be anything but evil?
 
 Remember that the good of life, where it has any good at all, is
 not due to anything in the partnership but to the repelling 
 of evil by
 virtue; death, then, must be the greater good.
 
 In a word, life in the body is of itself an evil but the Soul
 enters its Good through Virtue, not living the life of the
 Couplement but holding itself apart, even here.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 EIGHTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON THE NATURE AND SOURCE OF EVIL.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Those enquiring whence Evil enters into beings, or rather
 into a certain order of beings, would be making the best beginning
 if they established, first of all, what precisely Evil is, what
 constitutes its Nature. At once we should know whence it comes,
 where it has its native seat and where it is present merely as an
 accident; and there would be no further question as to whether it
 has Authentic-Existence.
 
 But a difficulty arises. By what faculty in us could we possibly
 know Evil?
 
 All knowing comes by likeness. The Intellectual-Principle and
 the Soul, being Ideal-Forms, would know Ideal-Forms and would have a
 natural tendency towards them; but who could imagine Evil to be an
 Ideal-Form, seeing that it manifests itself as the very absence of
 Good?
 
 If the solution is that the one act of knowing covers
 contraries, and that as Evil is the contrary to Good the one 
 act would
 grasp Good and Evil together, then to know Evil there must be first
 a clear perception and understanding of Good, since the nobler
 existences precede the baser and are Ideal-Forms while the less good
 hold no such standing, are nearer to Non-Being.
 
 No doubt there is a question in what precise way Good is
 contrary to Evil- whether it is as First-Principle to last of things
 or as Ideal-Form to utter Lack: but this subject we postpone.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. For the moment let us define the nature of the Good as far as
 the immediate purpose demands.
 
 The Good is that on which all else depends, towards which all
 Existences aspire as to their source and their need, while Itself is
 without need, sufficient to Itself, aspiring to no other, the
 measure and Term of all, giving out from itself the
 Intellectual-Principle and Existence and Soul and Life and all
 Intellective-Act.
 
 All until The Good is reached is beautiful; The Good is
 beyond-beautiful, beyond the Highest, holding kingly state in the
 Intellectual-Kosmos, that sphere constituted by a Principle wholly
 unlike what is known as Intelligence in us. Our intelligence is
 nourished on the propositions of logic, is skilled in following
 discussions, works by reasonings, examines links of 
 demonstration, and
 comes to know the world of Being also by the steps of 
 logical process,
 having no prior grasp of Reality but remaining empty, all 
 Intelligence
 though it be, until it has put itself to school.
 
 The Intellectual-Principle we are discussing is not of such a
 kind: It possesses all: It is all: It is present to all by Its
 self-presence: It has all by other means than having, for what It
 possesses is still Itself, nor does any particular of all within It
 stand apart; for every such particular is the whole and in all
 respects all, while yet not confused in the mass but still distinct,
 apart to the extent that any participant in the 
 Intellectual-Principle
 participates not in the entire as one thing but in whatsoever lies
 within its own reach.
 
 And the First Act is the Act of The Good stationary 
 within Itself,
 and the First Existence is the self-contained Existence of The Good;
 but there is also an Act upon It, that of the Intellectual-Principle
 which, as it were, lives about It.
 
 And the Soul, outside, circles around the
 Intellectual-Principle, and by gazing upon it, seeing into the
 depths of It, through It sees God.
 
 Such is the untroubled, the blissful, life of divine beings, and
 Evil has no place in it; if this were all, there would be no Evil
 but Good only, the first, the second and the third Good. All, thus
 far, is with the King of All, unfailing Cause of Good and Beauty and
 controller of all; and what is Good in the second degree depends
 upon the Second-Principle and tertiary Good upon the Third.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. If such be the Nature of Beings and of That which transcends
 all the realm of Being, Evil cannot have place among Beings or in
 the Beyond-Being; these are good.
 
 There remains, only, if Evil exist at all, that it be situate in
 the realm of Non-Being, that it be some mode, as it were, of the
 Non-Being, that it have its seat in something in touch with
 Non-Being or to a certain degree communicate in Non-Being.
 
 By this Non-Being, of course, we are not to understand something
 that simply does not exist, but only something of an utterly 
 different
 order from Authentic-Being: there is no question here of movement or
 position with regard to Being; the Non-Being we are thinking of is,
 rather, an image of Being or perhaps something still further removed
 than even an image.
 
 Now this [the required faint image of Being] might be 
 the sensible
 universe with all the impressions it engenders, or it might be
 something of even later derivation, accidental to the realm of
 sense, or again, it might be the source of the sense-world or
 something of the same order entering into it to complete it.
 
 Some conception of it would be reached by thinking of
 measurelessness as opposed to measure, of the unbounded 
 against bound,
 the unshaped against a principle of shape, the ever-needy against
 the self-sufficing: think of the ever-undefined, the never at rest,
 the all-accepting but never sated, utter dearth; and make all this
 character not mere accident in it but its equivalent for
 essential-being, so that, whatsoever fragment of it be taken, that
 part is all lawless void, while whatever participates in it and
 resembles it becomes evil, though not of course to the point 
 of being,
 as itself is, Evil-Absolute.
 
 In what substantial-form [hypostasis] then is all this to be
 found- not as accident but as the very substance itself?
 
 For if Evil can enter into other things, it must have in 
 a certain
 sense a prior existence, even though it may not be an essence. As
 there is Good, the Absolute, as well as Good, the quality, so,
 together with the derived evil entering into something not itself,
 there must be the Absolute Evil.
 
 But how? Can there be Unmeasure apart from an unmeasured object?
 
 Does not Measure exist apart from unmeasured things? Precisely
 as there is Measure apart from anything measured, so there is
 Unmeasure apart from the unmeasured. If Unmeasure could not exist
 independently, it must exist either in an unmeasured object or in
 something measured; but the unmeasured could not need Unmeasure and
 the measured could not contain it.
 
 There must, then, be some Undetermination-Absolute, some
 Absolute Formlessness; all the qualities cited as characterizing the
 Nature of Evil must be summed under an Absolute Evil; and every evil
 thing outside of this must either contain this Absolute by
 saturation or have taken the character of evil and become a cause of
 evil by consecration to this Absolute.
 
 What will this be?
 
 That Kind whose place is below all the patterns, forms, shapes,
 measurements and limits, that which has no trace of good by any
 title of its own, but [at best] takes order and grace from some
 Principle outside itself, a mere image as regards Absolute-Being but
 the Authentic Essence of Evil- in so far as Evil can have Authentic
 Being. In such a Kind, Reason recognizes the Primal Evil, Evil
 Absolute.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. The bodily Kind, in that it partakes of Matter is an evil
 thing. What form is in bodies is an untrue-form: they are without
 life: by their own natural disorderly movement they make away with
 each other; they are hindrances to the soul in its proper Act; in
 their ceaseless flux they are always slipping away from Being.
 
 Soul, on the contrary, since not every Soul is evil, is not an
 evil Kind.
 
 What, then, is the evil Soul?
 
 It is, we read, the Soul that has entered into the 
 service of that
 in which soul-evil is implanted by nature, in whose service the
 unreasoning phase of the Soul accepts evil- unmeasure, excess and
 shortcoming, which bring forth licentiousness, cowardice and 
 all other
 flaws of the Soul, all the states, foreign to the true nature, which
 set up false judgements, so that the Soul comes to name 
 things good or
 evil not by their true value but by the mere test of like 
 and dislike.
 
 But what is the root of this evil state? how can it be brought
 under the causing principle indicated?
 
 Firstly, such a Soul is not apart from Matter, is not purely
 itself. That is to say, it is touched with Unmeasure, it is shut out
 from the Forming-Idea that orders and brings to measure, and this
 because it is merged into a body made of Matter.
 
 Then if the Reasoning-Faculty too has taken hurt, the Soul's
 seeing is baulked by the passions and by the darkening that Matter
 brings to it, by its decline into Matter, by its very attention no
 longer to Essence but to Process- whose principle or source 
 is, again,
 Matter, the Kind so evil as to saturate with its own  pravity even
 that which is not in it but merely looks towards it.
 
 For, wholly without part in Good, the negation of Good,
 unmingled Lack, this Matter-Kind makes over to its own likeness
 whatsoever comes in touch with it.
 
 The Soul wrought to perfection, addressed towards the
 Intellectual-Principle, is steadfastly pure: it has turned away from
 Matter; all that is undetermined, that is outside of measure, that
 is evil, it neither sees nor draws near; it endures in its purity,
 only, and wholly, determined by the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 The Soul that breaks away from this source of its reality to the
 non-perfect and non-primal is, as it were, a secondary, an image, to
 the loyal Soul. By its falling-away- and to the extent of 
 the fall- it
 is stripped of Determination, becomes wholly indeterminate, sees
 darkness. Looking to what repels vision, as we look when we are said
 to see darkness, it has taken Matter into itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. But, it will be objected, if this seeing and 
 frequenting of the
 darkness is due to the lack of good, the Soul's evil has its 
 source in
 that very lack; the darkness will be merely a secondary cause- and
 at once the Principle of Evil is removed from Matter, is 
 made anterior
 to Matter.
 
 No: Evil is not in any and every lack; it is in absolute lack.
 What falls in some degree short of the Good is not Evil; 
 considered in
 its own kind it might even be perfect, but where there is utter
 dearth, there we have Essential Evil, void of all share in Good;
 this is the case with Matter.
 
 Matter has not even existence whereby to have some part in Good:
 Being is attributed to it by an accident of words: the truth would
 be that it has Non-Being.
 
 Mere lack brings merely Not-Goodness: Evil demands the absolute
 lack- though, of course, any very considerable shortcoming makes the
 ultimate fall possible and is already, in itself, an evil.
 
 In fine we are not to think of Evil as some particular bad
 thing- injustice, for example, or any other ugly trait- but as a
 principle distinct from any of the particular forms in which, by the
 addition of certain elements, it becomes manifest. Thus there may be
 wickedness in the Soul; the forms this general wickedness is to take
 will be determined by the environing Matter, by the faculties of the
 Soul that operate and by the nature of their operation, whether
 seeing, acting, or merely admitting impression.
 
 But supposing things external to the Soul are to be counted
 Evil- sickness, poverty and so forth- how can they be referred to
 the principle we have described?
 
 Well, sickness is excess or defect in the body, which as a
 material organism rebels against order and measure; ugliness is but
 matter not mastered by Ideal-Form; poverty consists in our need and
 lack of goods made necessary to us by our association with Matter
 whose very nature is to be one long want.
 
 If all this be true, we cannot be, ourselves, the source of
 Evil, we are not evil in ourselves; Evil was before we came 
 to be; the
 Evil which holds men down binds them against their will; and 
 for those
 that have the strength- not found in all men, it is true- there is a
 deliverance from the evils that have found lodgement in the soul.
 
 In a word since Matter belongs only to the sensible 
 world, vice in
 men is not the Absolute Evil; not all men are vicious; some overcome
 vice, some, the better sort, are never attacked by it; and those who
 master it win by means of that in them which is not material.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. If this be so, how do we explain the teaching that evils can
 never pass away but "exist of necessity," that "while evil has no
 place in the divine order, it haunts mortal nature and this place
 for ever"?
 
 Does this mean that heaven is clear of evil, ever moving its
 orderly way, spinning on the appointed path, no injustice 
 There or any
 flaw, no wrong done by any power to any other but all true to the
 settled plan, while injustice and disorder prevail on earth,
 designated as "the Mortal Kind and this Place"?
 
 Not quite so: for the precept to "flee hence" does not refer to
 earth and earthly life. The flight we read of consists not 
 in quitting
 earth but in living our earth-life "with justice and piety in the
 light of philosophy"; it is vice we are to flee, so that clearly to
 the writer Evil is simply vice with the sequels of vice. And when
 the disputant in that dialogue says that, if men could be 
 convinced of
 the doctrine advanced, there would be an end of Evil, he is
 answered, "That can never be: Evil is of necessity, for there must
 be a contrary to good."
 
 Still we may reasonably ask how can vice in man be a contrary to
 The Good in the Supernal: for vice is the contrary to virtue and
 virtue is not The Good but merely the good thing by which Matter is
 brought to order.
 
 How can there any contrary to the Absolute Good, when 
 the absolute
 has no quality?
 
 Besides, is there any universal necessity that the existence of
 one of two contraries should entail the existence of the other?
 Admit that the existence of one is often accompanied by the
 existence of the other- sickness and health, for example- 
 yet there is
 no universal compulsion.
 
 Perhaps, however, our author did not mean that this was
 universally true; he is speaking only of The Good.
 
 But then, if The Good is an essence, and still more, if 
 It is that
 which transcends all existence, how can It have any contrary?
 
 That there is nothing contrary to essence is certain in the case
 of particular existences- established by practical proof- but not in
 the quite different case of the Universal.
 
 But of what nature would this contrary be, the contrary to
 universal existence and in general to the Primals?
 
 To essential existence would be opposed the non-existence; to
 the nature of Good, some principle and source of evil. Both 
 these will
 be sources, the one of what is good, the other of what is evil; and
 all within the domain of the one principle is opposed, as 
 contrary, to
 the entire domain of the other, and this in a contrariety 
 more violent
 than any existing between secondary things.
 
 For these last are opposed as members of one species or of one
 genus, and, within that common ground, they participate in 
 some common
 quality.
 
 In the case of the Primals or Universals there is such complete
 separation that what is the exact negation of one group constitutes
 the very nature of the other; we have diametric contrariety if by
 contrariety we mean the extreme of remoteness.
 
 Now to the content of the divine order, the fixed quality, the
 measuredness and so forth- there is opposed the content of the evil
 principle, its unfixedness, measurelessness and so forth: total is
 opposed to total. The existence of the one genus is a falsity,
 primarily, essentially, a falseness: the other genus has
 Essence-Authentic: the opposition is of truth to lie; essence is
 opposed to essence.
 
 Thus we see that it is not universally true that an Essence can
 have no contrary.
 
 In the case of fire and water we would admit contrariety if it
 were not for their common element, the Matter, about which are
 gathered the warmth and dryness of one and the dampness and cold of
 the other: if there were only present what constitutes their
 distinct kinds, the common ground being absent, there would be, here
 also, essence contrary to essence.
 
 In sum, things utterly sundered, having nothing in common,
 standing at the remotest poles, are opposites in nature: the
 contrariety does not depend upon quality or upon the existence of a
 distinct genus of beings, but upon the utmost difference, clash in
 content, clash in effect.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. But why does the existence of the Principle of Good 
 necessarily
 comport the existence of a Principle of Evil? Is it because the All
 necessarily comports the existence of Matter? Yes: for necessarily
 this All is made up of contraries: it could not exist if Matter did
 not. The Nature of this Kosmos is, therefore, a blend; it is blended
 from the Intellectual-Principle and Necessity: what comes 
 into it from
 God is good; evil is from the Ancient Kind which, we read, is the
 underlying Matter not yet brought to order by the Ideal-Form.
 
 But, since the expression "this place" must be taken to mean the
 All, how explain the words "mortal nature"?
 
 The answer is in the passage [in which the Father of Gods
 addresses the Divinities of the lower sphere], "Since you 
 possess only
 a derivative being, you are not immortals... but by my power 
 you shall
 escape dissolution."
 
 The escape, we read, is not a matter of place, but of acquiring
 virtue, of disengaging the self from the body; this is the 
 escape from
 Matter. Plato explains somewhere how a man frees himself and how he
 remains bound; and the phrase "to live among the gods" means to live
 among the Intelligible-Existents, for these are the Immortals.
 
 There is another consideration establishing the necessary
 existence of Evil.
 
 Given that The Good is not the only existent thing, it is
 inevitable that, by the outgoing from it or, if the phrase be
 preferred, the continuous down-going or away-going from it, there
 should be produced a Last, something after which nothing more can be
 produced: this will be Evil.
 
 As necessarily as there is Something after the First, so
 necessarily there is a Last: this Last is Matter, the thing which
 has no residue of good in it: here is the necessity of Evil.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. But there will still be some to deny that it is through this
 Matter that we ourselves become evil.
 
 They will say that neither ignorance nor wicked desires arise in
 Matter. Even if they admit that the unhappy condition within 
 us is due
 to the  pravity inherent in body, they will urge that still the
 blame lies not in the Matter itself but with the Form present in it-
 such Form as heat, cold, bitterness, saltness and all other 
 conditions
 perceptible to sense, or again such states as being full or void-
 not in the concrete signification but in the presence or absence of
 just such forms. In a word, they will argue, all particularity in
 desires and even in perverted judgements upon things, can be
 referred to such causes, so that Evil lies in this Form much 
 more than
 in the mere Matter.
 
 Yet, even with all this, they can be compelled to admit that
 Matter is the Evil.
 
 For, the quality [form] that has entered into Matter does not
 act as an entity apart from the Matter, any more than axe-shape will
 cut apart from iron. Further, Forms lodged in Matter are not the
 same as they would be if they remained within themselves; they are
 Reason-Principles Materialized, they are corrupted in the 
 Matter, they
 have absorbed its nature: essential fire does not burn, nor do any
 of the essential entities effect, of themselves alone, the operation
 which, once they have entered into Matter, is traced to their action.
 
 Matter becomes mistress of what is manifested through it: it
 corrupts and destroys the incomer, it substitutes its own opposite
 character and kind, not in the sense of opposing, for example,
 concrete cold to concrete warmth, but by setting its own
 formlessness against the Form of heat, shapelessness to shape,
 excess and defect to the duly ordered. Thus, in sum, what enters
 into Matter ceases to belong to itself, comes to belong to Matter,
 just as, in the nourishment of living beings, what is taken in does
 not remain as it came, but is turned into, say, dog's blood and all
 that goes to make a dog, becomes, in fact, any of the humours of any
 recipient.
 
 No, if body is the cause of Evil, then there is no escape; the
 cause of Evil is Matter.
 
 Still, it will be urged, the incoming Idea should have been able
 to conquer the Matter.
 
 The difficulty is that Matter's master cannot remain pure itself
 except by avoidance of Matter.
 
 Besides, the constitution determines both the desires and their
 violence so that there are bodies in which the incoming idea cannot
 hold sway: there is a vicious constitution which chills and clogs
 the activity and inhibits choice; a contrary bodily habit produces
 frivolity, lack of balance. The same fact is indicated by our
 successive variations of mood: in times of stress, we are 
 not the same
 either in desires or in ideas- as when we are at peace, and we
 differ again with every several object that brings us satisfaction.
 
 To resume: the Measureless is evil primarily; whatever, either
 by resemblance or participation, exists in the state of unmeasure,
 is evil secondarily, by force of its dealing with the Primal-
 primarily, the darkness; secondarily, the darkened. Now, Vice, being
 an ignorance and a lack of measure in the Soul, is secondarily evil,
 not the Essential Evil, just as Virtue is not the Primal Good but is
 Likeness to The Good, or participation in it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. But what approach have we to the knowing of Good and Evil?
 
 And first of the Evil of soul: Virtue, we may know by the
 Intellectual-Principle and by means of the philosophic habit; but
 Vice?
 
 A a ruler marks off straight from crooked, so Vice is 
 known by its
 divergence from the line of Virtue.
 
 But are we able to affirm Vice by any vision we can have 
 of it, or
 is there some other way of knowing it?
 
 Utter viciousness, certainly not by any vision, for it is
 utterly outside of bound and measure; this thing which is nowhere
 can be seized only by abstraction; but any degree of evil falling
 short of The Absolute is knowable by the extent of that 
 falling short.
 
 We see partial wrong; from what is before us we divine that
 which is lacking to the entire form [or Kind] thus indicated; we see
 that the completed Kind would be the Indeterminate; by this 
 process we
 are able to identify and affirm Evil. In the same way when we
 observe what we feel to be an ugly appearance in Matter- left there
 because the Reason-Principle has not become so completely the master
 as to cover over the unseemliness- we  recognise Ugliness by the
 falling-short from Ideal-Form.
 
 But how can we identify what has never had any touch of Form?
 
 We utterly eliminate every kind of Form; and the object in which
 there is none whatever we call Matter: if we are to see 
 Matter we must
 so completely abolish Form that we take shapelessness into our very
 selves.
 
 In fact it is another Intellectual-Principle, not the true, this
 which ventures a vision so uncongenial.
 
 To see darkness the eye withdraws from the light; it is striving
 to cease from seeing, therefore it abandons the light which 
 would make
 the darkness invisible; away from the light its power is rather that
 of not-seeing than of seeing and this not-seeing is its nearest
 approach to seeing Darkness. So the Intellectual-Principle, in order
 to see its contrary [Matter], must leave its own light locked up
 within itself, and as it were go forth from itself into an outside
 realm, it must ignore its native brightness and submit itself to the
 very contradition of its being.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. But if Matter is devoid of quality how can it be evil?
 
 It is described as being devoid of quality in the sense only
 that it does not essentially possess any of the qualities which it
 admits and which enter into it as into a substratum. No one says
 that it has no nature; and if it has any nature at all, why may not
 that nature be evil though not in the sense of quality?
 
 Quality qualifies something not itself: it is therefore an
 accidental; it resides in some other object. Matter does not exist
 in some other object but is the substratum in which the accidental
 resides. Matter, then, is said to be devoid of Quality in 
 that it does
 not in itself possess this thing which is by nature an 
 accidental. If,
 moreover, Quality itself be devoid of Quality, how can Matter, which
 is the unqualified, be said to have it?
 
 Thus, it is quite correct to say at once that Matter is without
 Quality and that it is evil: it is Evil not in the sense of having
 Quality but, precisely, in not having it; give it Quality and in its
 very Evil it would almost be a Form, whereas in Truth it is a Kind
 contrary to Form.
 
 "But," it may be said, "the Kind opposed to all Form is
 Privation or Negation, and this necessarily refers to something
 other than itself, it is no Substantial-Existence: therefore if Evil
 is Privation or Negation it must be lodged in some Negation of Form:
 there will be no Self-Existent Evil."
 
 This objection may be answered by applying the principle to the
 case of Evil in the Soul; the Evil, the Vice, will be a Negation and
 not anything having a separate existence; we come to the doctrine
 which denies Matter or, admitting it, denies its Evil; we need not
 seek elsewhere; we may at once place Evil in the Soul, recognising
 it as the mere absence of Good. But if the negation is the 
 negation of
 something that ought to become present, if it is a denial of the
 Good by the Soul, then the Soul produces vice within itself by the
 operation of its own Nature, and is devoid of good and, therefore,
 Soul though it be, devoid of life: the Soul, if it has no life, is
 soulless; the Soul is no Soul.
 
 No; the Soul has life by its own nature and therefore 
 does not, of
 its own nature, contain this negation of The Good: it has 
 much good in
 it; it carries a happy trace of the Intellectual-Principle and is
 not essentially evil: neither is it  primally evil nor is that
 Primal Evil present in it even as an accidental, for the Soul is not
 wholly apart from the Good.
 
 Perhaps Vice and Evil as in the Soul should be described 
 not as an
 entire, but as a partial, negation of good.
 
 But if this were so, part of the Soul must possess The Good,
 part be without it; the Soul will have a mingled nature and the Evil
 within it will not be unblended: we have not yet lighted on the
 Primal, Unmingled Evil. The Soul would possess the Good as its
 Essence, the Evil as an Accidental.
 
 Perhaps Evil is merely an impediment to the Soul like something
 affecting the eye and so hindering sight.
 
 But such an evil in the eyes is no more than an occasion of
 evil, the Absolute Evil is something quite different. If then Vice
 is an impediment to the Soul, Vice is an occasion of evil but not
 Evil-Absolute. Virtue is not the Absolute Good, but a 
 co-operator with
 it; and if Virtue is not the Absolute Good neither is Vice the
 Absolute Evil. Virtue is not the Absolute Beauty or the 
 Absolute Good;
 neither, therefore, is Vice the Essential Ugliness or the Essential
 Evil.
 
 We teach that Virtue is not the Absolute Good and Beauty,
 because we know that These are earlier than Virtue and transcend it,
 and that it is good and beautiful by some participation in them. Now
 as, going upward from virtue, we come to the Beautiful and to the
 Good, so, going downward from Vice, we reach Essential Evil: 
 from Vice
 as the starting-point we come to vision of Evil, as far as 
 such vision
 is possible, and we become evil to the extent of our participation
 in it. We are become dwellers in the Place of Unlikeness, where,
 fallen from all our resemblance to the Divine, we lie in gloom and
 mud: for if the Soul abandons itself unreservedly to the extreme of
 viciousness, it is no longer a vicious Soul merely, for mere vice is
 still human, still carries some trace of good: it has taken to
 itself another nature, the Evil, and as far as Soul can die it is
 dead. And the death of Soul is twofold: while still sunk in body to
 lie down in Matter and drench itself with it; when it has left the
 body, to lie in the other world until, somehow, it stirs again and
 lifts its sight from the mud: and this is our "going down to 
 Hades and
 slumbering there."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. It may be suggested that Vice is feebleness in the Soul.
 
 We shall be reminded that the Vicious Soul is unstable, swept
 along from every ill to every other, quickly stirred by appetites,
 headlong to anger, as hasty to compromises, yielding at once to
 obscure imaginations, as weak, in fact, as the weakest thing made by
 man or nature, blown about by every breeze, burned away by 
 every heat.
 
 Still the question must be faced what constitutes this 
 weakness in
 the Soul, whence it comes.
 
 For weakness in the body is not like that in the Soul: the word
 weakness, which covers the incapacity for work and the lack of
 resistance in the body, is applied to the Soul merely by analogy-
 unless, indeed, in the one case as in the other, the cause of the
 weakness is Matter.
 
 But we must go more thoroughly into the source of this weakness,
 as we call it, in the Soul, which is certainly not made weak as the
 result of any density or rarity, or by any thickening or thinning or
 anything like a disease, like a fever.
 
 Now this weakness must be seated either in Souls utterly
 disengaged or in Souls bound to Matter or in both.
 
 It cannot exist in those apart from Matter, for all 
 these are pure
 and, as we read, winged and perfect and unimpeded in their 
 task: there
 remains only that the weakness be in the fallen Souls, neither
 cleansed nor clean; and in them the weakness will be, not in any
 privation but in some hostile presence, like that of phlegm 
 or bile in
 the organs of the body.
 
 If we form an acute and accurate notion of the cause of the fall
 we shall understand the weakness that comes by it.
 
 Matter exists; Soul exists; and they occupy, so to speak, one
 place. There is not one place for Matter and another for
 Soul-Matter, for instance, kept to earth, Soul in the air: the
 soul's "separate place" is simply its not being in Matter; that is,
 its not being united with it; that is that there be no compound unit
 consisting of Soul and Matter; that is that Soul be not moulded in
 Matter as in a matrix; this is the Soul's apartness.
 
 But the faculties of the Soul are many, and it has its
 beginning, its intermediate phases, its final fringe. Matter
 appears, importunes, raises disorders, seeks to force its way
 within; but all the ground is holy, nothing there without part in
 Soul. Matter therefore submits, and takes light: but the 
 source of its
 illumination it cannot attain to, for the Soul cannot lift up this
 foreign thing close by, since the evil of it makes it invisible. On
 the contrary the illumination, the light streaming from the Soul, is
 dulled, is weakened, as it mixes with Matter which offers 
 Birth to the
 Soul, providing the means by which it enters into generation,
 impossible to it if no recipient were at hand.
 
 This is the fall of the Soul, this entry into Matter: thence its
 weakness: not all the faculties of its being retain free play, for
 Matter hinders their manifestation; it encroaches upon the Soul's
 territory and, as it were, crushes the Soul back; and it 
 turns to evil
 all that it has stolen, until the Soul finds strength to advance
 again.
 
 Thus the cause, at once, of the weakness of Soul and of all its
 evil is Matter.
 
 The evil of Matter precedes the weakness, the vice; it is Primal
 Evil. Even though the Soul itself submits to Matter and engenders to
 it; if it becomes evil within itself by its commerce with Matter,
 the cause is still the presence of Matter: the Soul would never have
 approached Matter but that the presence of Matter is the occasion of
 its earth-life.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. If the existence of Matter be denied, the necessity of this
 Principle must be demonstrated from the treatises "On Matter" where
 the question is copiously treated.
 
 To deny Evil a place among realities is necessarily to do away
 with the Good as well, and even to deny the existence of anything
 desirable; it is to deny desire, avoidance and all intellectual act;
 for desire has Good for its object, aversion looks to Evil; all
 intellectual act, all Wisdom, deals with Good and Bad, and is itself
 one of the things that are good.
 
 There must then be The Good- good unmixed- and the Mingled Good
 and Bad, and the Rather Bad than Good, this last ending with the
 Utterly Bad we have been seeking, just as that in which Evil
 constitutes the lesser part tends, by that lessening, towards the
 Good.
 
 What, then, must Evil be to the Soul?
 
 What Soul could contain Evil unless by contact with the lower
 Kind? There could be no desire, no sorrow, no rage, no fear: fear
 touches the compounded dreading its dissolution; pain and sorrow are
 the accompaniments of the dissolution; desires spring from something
 troubling the grouped being or are a provision against trouble
 threatened; all impression is the stroke of something unreasonable
 outside the Soul, accepted only because the Soul is not devoid of
 parts or phases; the Soul takes up false notions through having gone
 outside of its own truth by ceasing to be purely itself.
 
 One desire or appetite there is which does not fall under this
 condemnation; it is the aspiration towards the 
 Intellectual-Principle:
 this demands only that the Soul dwell alone enshrined within that
 place of its choice, never lapsing towards the lower.
 
 Evil is not alone: by virtue of the nature of Good, the power of
 Good, it is not Evil only: it appears, necessarily, bound around
 with bonds of Beauty, like some captive bound in fetters of gold;
 and beneath these it is hidden so that, while it must exist, it may
 not be seen by the gods, and that men need not always have 
 evil before
 their eyes, but that when it comes before them they may still be not
 destitute of Images of the Good and Beautiful for their Remembrance.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 NINTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 "THE REASONED DISMISSAL".
 
 
 "You will not dismiss your Soul lest it go forth..." [taking
 something with it].
 
 For wheresoever it go, it will be in some definite condition,
 and its going forth is to some new place. The Soul will wait for the
 body to be completely severed from it; then it makes no departure;
 it simply finds itself free.
 
 But how does the body come to be separated?
 
 The separation takes place when nothing of Soul remains bound up
 with it: the harmony within the body, by virtue of which the Soul
 was retained, is broken and it can no longer hold its guest.
 
 But when a man contrives the dissolution of the body, it is he
 that has used violence and torn himself away, not the body that has
 let the Soul slip from it. And in loosing the bond he has not been
 without passion; there has been revolt or grief or anger, movements
 which it is unlawful to indulge.
 
 But if a man feel himself to be losing his reason?
 
 That is not likely in the Sage, but if it should occur, 
 it must be
 classed with the inevitable, to be welcome at the bidding of the
 fact though not for its own sake. To call upon drugs to the 
 release of
 the Soul seems a strange way of assisting its purposes.
 
 And if there be a period allotted to all by fate, to anticipate
 the hour could not be a happy act, unless, as we have 
 indicated, under
 stern necessity.
 
 If everyone is to hold in the other world a standing 
 determined by
 the state in which he quitted this, there must be no withdrawal as
 long as there is any hope of progress.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THE SECOND ENNEAD
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIRST TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON THE KOSMOS OR ON THE HEAVENLY SYSTEM.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. We hold that the ordered universe, in its material mass, has
 existed for ever and will for ever endure: but simply to refer this
 perdurance to the Will of God, however true an explanation, 
 is utterly
 inadequate.
 
 The elements of this sphere change; the living beings of earth
 pass away; only the Ideal-form [the species] persists: possibly a
 similar process obtains in the All.
 
 The Will of God is able to cope with the ceaseless flux 
 and escape
 of body stuff by ceaselessly reintroducing the known forms in new
 substances, thus ensuring perpetuity not to the particular 
 item but to
 the unity of idea: now, seeing that objects of this realm possess no
 more than duration of form, why should celestial objects, and the
 celestial system itself, be distinguished by duration of the
 particular entity?
 
 Let us suppose this persistence to be the result of the
 all-inclusiveness of the celestial and universal- with its
 consequence, the absence of any outlying matter into which change
 could take place or which could break in and destroy.
 
 This explanation would, no doubt, safeguard the integrity of the
 Whole, of the All; but our sun and the individual being of the other
 heavenly bodies would not on these terms be secured in perpetuity:
 they are parts; no one of them is in itself the whole, the all; it
 would still be probable that theirs is no more than that duration in
 form which belongs to fire and such entities.
 
 This would apply even to the entire ordered universe itself. For
 it is very possible that this too, though not in process of
 destruction from outside, might have only formal duration; its parts
 may be so wearing each other down as to keep it in a continuous
 decay while, amid the ceaseless flux of the Kind constituting its
 base, an outside power ceaselessly restores the form: in this way
 the living All may lie under the same conditions as man and horse
 and the rest man and horse persisting but not the individual of the
 type.
 
 With this, we would have no longer the distinction of one order,
 the heavenly system, stable for ever, and another, the earthly, in
 process of decay: all would be alike except in the point of time;
 the celestial would merely be longer lasting. If, then, we accepted
 this duration of type alone as a true account of the All equally
 with its partial members, our difficulties would be eased- or indeed
 we should have no further problem- once the Will of God were shown
 to be capable, under these conditions and by such communication, of
 sustaining the Universe.
 
 But if we are obliged to allow individual persistence to any
 definite entity within the Kosmos then, firstly, we must 
 show that the
 Divine Will is adequate to make it so; secondly, we have to face the
 question, What accounts for some things having individual
 persistence and others only the persistence of type? and, thirdly,
 we ask how the partial entities of the celestial system hold a real
 duration which would thus appear possible to all partial things.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Supposing we accept this view and hold that, while 
 things below
 the moon's orb have merely type-persistence, the celestial realm and
 all its several members possess individual eternity; it remains to
 show how this strict permanence of the individual identity- 
 the actual
 item eternally unchangeable- can belong to what is certainly
 corporeal, seeing that bodily substance is characteristically a
 thing of flux.
 
 The theory of bodily flux is held by Plato no less than by the
 other philosophers who have dealt with physical matters, and is
 applied not only to ordinary bodies but to those, also, of the
 heavenly sphere.
 
 "How," he asks, "can these corporeal and visible 
 entities continue
 eternally unchanged in identity?"- evidently agreeing, in this
 matter also, with Herakleitos who maintained that even the sun is
 perpetually coming anew into being. To Aristotle there would be no
 problem; it is only accepting his theories of a fifth-substance.
 
 But to those who reject Aristotle's Quintessence and hold the
 material mass of the heavens to consist of the elements 
 underlying the
 living things of this sphere, how is individual permanence possible?
 And the difficulty is still greater for the parts, for the 
 sun and the
 heavenly bodies.
 
 Every living thing is a combination of soul and body-kind: the
 celestial sphere, therefore, if it is to be everlasting as an
 individual entity must be so in virtue either of both these
 constituents or of one of them, by the combination of soul 
 and body or
 by soul only or by body only.
 
 Of course anyone that holds body to be incorruptible secures the
 desired permanence at once; no need, then, to call on a soul 
 or on any
 perdurable conjunction to account for the continued maintenance of a
 living being.
 
 But the case is different when one holds that body is, of
 itself, perishable and that Soul is the principle of permanence:
 this view obliges us to the proof that the character of body 
 is not in
 itself fatal either to the coherence or to the lasting 
 stability which
 are imperative: it must be shown that the two elements of the union
 envisaged are not inevitably hostile, but that on the 
 contrary [in the
 heavens] even Matter must conduce to the scheme of the standing
 result.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. We have to ask, that is, how Matter, this entity of ceaseless
 flux constituting the physical mass of the universe, could serve
 towards the immortality of the Kosmos.
 
 And our answer is "Because the flux is not outgoing": where
 there is motion within but not outwards and the total remains
 unchanged, there is neither growth nor decline, and thus the Kosmos
 never ages.
 
 We have a parallel in our earth, constant from eternity 
 to pattern
 and to mass; the air, too, never fails; and there is always 
 water: all
 the changes of these elements leave unchanged the Principle of the
 total living thing, our world. In our own constitution, again, there
 is a ceaseless shifting of particles- and that with outgoing 
 loss- and
 yet the individual persists for a long time: where there is no
 question of an outside region, the body-principle cannot clash with
 soul as against the identity and endless duration of the 
 living thing.
 
 Of these material elements- for example- fire, the keen 
 and swift,
 cooperates by its upward tendency as earth by its lingering 
 below; for
 we must not imagine that the fire, once it finds itself at the point
 where its ascent must stop, settles down as in its appropriate
 place, no longer seeking, like all the rest, to expand in both
 directions. No: but higher is not possible; lower is repugnant to
 its Kind; all that remains for it is to be tractable and, 
 answering to
 a need of its nature, to be drawn by the Soul to the 
 activity of life,
 and so to move to in a glorious place, in the Soul. Anyone 
 that dreads
 its falling may take heart; the circuit of the Soul provides against
 any declination, embracing, sustaining; and since fire has of itself
 no downward tendency it accepts that guiding without resistance. The
 partial elements constituting our persons do not suffice for 
 their own
 cohesion; once they are brought to human shape, they must borrow
 elsewhere if the organism is to be maintained: but in the upper
 spheres since there can be no loss by flux no such replenishment is
 needed.
 
 Suppose such loss, suppose fire extinguished there, then a new
 fire must be kindled; so also if such loss by flux could 
 occur in some
 of the superiors from which the celestial fire depends, that too
 must be replaced: but with such transmutations, while there might be
 something continuously similar, there would be, no longer, a Living
 All abidingly self-identical.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. But matters are involved here which demand specific
 investigation and cannot be treated as incidental merely to our
 present problem. We are faced with several questions: Is the
 heavenly system exposed to any such flux as would occasion 
 the need of
 some restoration corresponding to nourishment; or do its 
 members, once
 set in their due places, suffer no loss of substance, permanent by
 Kind? Does it consist of fire only, or is it mainly of fire with the
 other elements, as well, taken up and carried in the circuit by the
 dominant Principle?
 
 Our doctrine of the immortality of the heavenly system rests on
 the firmest foundation once we have cited the sovereign agent, the
 soul, and considered, besides, the peculiar excellence of the bodily
 substance constituting the stars, a material so pure, so entirely
 the noblest, and chosen by the soul as, in all living beings, the
 determining principle appropriates to itself the choicest among
 their characteristic parts. No doubt Aristotle is right in 
 speaking of
 flame as a turmoil, fire insolently rioting; but the 
 celestial fire is
 equable, placid, docile to the purposes of the stars.
 
 Still, the great argument remains, the Soul, moving in its
 marvellous might second only to the very loftiest Existents: 
 how could
 anything once placed within this Soul break away from it into
 non-being? No one that understands this principle, the support of
 all things, can fail to see that, sprung from God, it is a stronger
 stay than any bonds.
 
 And is it conceivable that the Soul, valid to sustain for a
 certain space of time, could not so sustain for ever? This 
 would be to
 assume that it holds things together by violence; that there is a
 "natural course" at variance with what actually exists in the nature
 of the universe and in these exquisitely ordered beings; and that
 there is some power able to storm the established system and destroy
 its ordered coherence, some kingdom or dominion that may shatter the
 order founded by the Soul.
 
 Further: The Kosmos has had no beginning- the impossibility has
 been shown elsewhere- and this is warrant for its continued 
 existence.
 Why should there be in the future a change that has not yet
 occurred? The elements there are not worn away like beams 
 and rafters:
 they hold sound for ever, and so the All holds sound. And even
 supposing these elements to be in ceaseless transmutation, 
 yet the All
 persists: the ground of all the change must itself be changeless.
 
 As to any alteration of purpose in the Soul we have already
 shown the emptiness of that fancy: the administration of the
 universe entails neither labour nor loss; and, even supposing the
 possibility of annihilating all that is material, the Soul 
 would be no
 whit the better or the worse.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. But how explain the permanence There, while the 
 content of this
 sphere- its elements and its living things alike- are passing?
 
 The reason is given by Plato: the celestial order is 
 from God, the
 living things of earth from the gods sprung from God; and it is law
 that the offspring of God endures.
 
 In other words, the celestial soul- and our souls with 
 it- springs
 directly next from the Creator, while the animal life of 
 this earth is
 produced by an image which goes forth from that celestial 
 soul and may
 be said to flow downwards from it.
 
 A soul, then, of the minor degree- reproducing, indeed, that of
 the Divine sphere but lacking in power inasmuch as it must exercise
 its creative act upon inferior stuff in an inferior region- the
 substances taken up into the fabric being of themselves repugnant to
 duration; with such an origin the living things of this realm cannot
 be of strength to last for ever; the material constituents are not
 as firmly held and controlled as if they were ruled immediately by a
 Principle of higher potency.
 
 The heavens, on the contrary, must have persistence as a whole,
 and this entails the persistence of the parts, of the stars they
 contain: we could not imagine that whole to endure with the parts in
 flux- though, of course, we must distinguish things 
 sub-celestial from
 the heavens themselves whose region does not in fact extend so low
 as to the moon.
 
 Our own case is different: physically we are formed by that
 [inferior] soul, given forth [not directly from God but] from the
 divine beings in the heavens and from the heavens 
 themselves; it is by
 way of that inferior soul that we are associated with the body
 [which therefore will not be persistent]; for the higher soul which
 constitutes the We is the principle not of our existence but of our
 excellence or, if also of our existence, then only in the sense
 that, when the body is already constituted, it enters, bringing with
 it some effluence from the Divine Reason in support of the existence.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. We may now consider the question whether fire is the sole
 element existing in that celestial realm and whether there is any
 outgoing thence with the consequent need of renewal.
 
 Timaeus pronounced the material frame of the All to consist
 primarily of earth and fire for visibility, earth for solidity- and
 deduced that the stars must be mainly composed of fire, but 
 not solely
 since there is no doubt they are solid.
 
 And this is probably a true account. Plato accepts it as 
 indicated
 by all the appearances. And, in fact, to all our perception- 
 as we see
 them and derive from them the impression of illumination- the stars
 appear to be mostly, if not exclusively, fire: but on reasoning into
 the matter we judge that since solidity cannot exist apart from
 earth-matter, they must contain earth as well.
 
 But what place could there be for the other elements? It is
 impossible to imagine water amid so vast a conflagration; and if air
 were present it would be continually changing into fire.
 
 Admitting [with Timaeus; as a logical truth] that two
 self-contained entities, standing as extremes to each other need for
 their coherence two intermediaries; we may still question 
 whether this
 holds good with regard to physical bodies. Certainly water and earth
 can be mixed without any such intermediate. It might seem valid to
 object that the intermediates are already present in the 
 earth and the
 water; but a possible answer would be, "Yes, but not as agents whose
 meeting is necessary to the coherence of those extremes."
 
 None the less we will take it that the coherence of extremes is
 produced by virtue of each possessing all the intermediates. It is
 still not proven that fire is necessary to the visibility of 
 earth and
 earth to the solidarity of fire.
 
 On this principle, nothing possesses an essential-nature of its
 very own; every several thing is a blend, and its name is merely an
 indication of the dominant constituent.
 
 Thus we are told that earth cannot have concrete 
 existence without
 the help of some moist element- the moisture in water being the
 necessary adhesive- but admitting that we so find it, there 
 is still a
 contradiction in pretending that any one element has a being of its
 own and in the same breath denying its self-coherence, making its
 subsistence depend upon others, and so, in reality, reducing the
 specific element to nothing. How can we talk of the existence of the
 definite Kind, earth- earth essential- if there exists no single
 particle of earth which actually is earth without any need 
 of water to
 secure its self-cohesion? What has such an adhesive to act upon if
 there is absolutely no given magnitude of real earth to which it may
 bind particle after particle in its business of producing the
 continuous mass? If there is any such given magnitude, large 
 or small,
 of pure earth, then earth can exist in its own nature, independently
 of water: if there is no such primary particle of pure earth, then
 there is nothing whatever for the water to bind. As for air- air
 unchanged, retaining its distinctive quality- how could it conduce
 to the subsistence of a dense material like earth?
 
 Similarly with fire. No doubt Timaeus speaks of it as necessary
 not to the existence but to the visibility of earth and the other
 elements; and certainly light is essential to all visibility- we
 cannot say that we see darkness, which implies, precisely, that
 nothing is seen, as silence means nothing being heard.
 
 But all this does not assure us that the earth to be visible
 must contain fire: light is sufficient: snow, for example, and other
 extremely cold substances gleam without the presence of fire- though
 of course it might be said that fire was once there and communicated
 colour before disappearing.
 
 As to the composition of water, we must leave it an open
 question whether there can be such a thing as water without a
 certain proportion of earth.
 
 But how can air, the yielding element, contain earth?
 
 Fire, again: is earth perhaps necessary there since fire 
 is by its
 own nature devoid of continuity and not a thing of three dimensions?
 
 Supposing it does not possess the solidity of the three
 dimensions, it has that of its thrust; now, cannot this belong to it
 by the mere right and fact of its being one of the corporeal
 entities in nature? Hardness is another matter, a property 
 confined to
 earth-stuff. Remember that gold- which is water- becomes dense by
 the accession not of earth but of denseness or consolidation: in the
 same way fire, with Soul present within it, may consolidate itself
 upon the power of the Soul; and there are living beings of fire
 among the Celestials.
 
 But, in sum, do we abandon the teaching that all the elements
 enter into the composition of every living thing?
 
 For this sphere, no; but to lift clay into the heavens is
 against nature, contrary to the laws of her ordaining: it is
 difficult, too, to think of that swiftest of circuits bearing along
 earthly bodies in its course nor could such material conduce to the
 splendour and white glint of the celestial fire.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. We can scarcely do better, in fine, than follow Plato.
 
 Thus:
 
 In the universe as a whole there must necessarily be 
 such a degree
 of solidity, that is to say, of resistance, as will ensure that the
 earth, set in the centre, be a sure footing and support to the
 living beings moving over it, and inevitably communicate something
 of its own density to them: the earth will possess coherence by its
 own unaided quality, but visibility by the presence of fire: it will
 contain water against the dryness which would prevent the cohesion
 of its particles; it will hold air to lighten its bulky matters; it
 will be in contact with the celestial fire- not as being a member of
 the sidereal system but by the simple fact that the fire 
 there and our
 earth both belong to the ordered universe so that something of the
 earth is taken up by the fire as something of the fire by the earth
 and something of everything by everything else.
 
 This borrowing, however, does not mean that the one thing
 taking-up from the other enters into a composition, becoming an
 element in a total of both: it is simply a consequence of the kosmic
 fellowship; the participant retains its own being and takes over not
 the thing itself but some property of the thing, not air but air's
 yielding softness, not fire but fire's incandescence: mixing is
 another process, a complete surrender with a resultant compound not,
 as in this case, earth- remaining earth, the solidity and density we
 know- with something of fire's qualities superadded.
 
 We have authority for this where we read:
 
 "At the second circuit from the earth, God kindled a 
 light": he is
 speaking of the sun which, elsewhere, he calls the all-glowing and,
 again, the all-gleaming: thus he prevents us imagining it to be
 anything else but fire, though of a peculiar kind; in other words it
 is light, which he distinguishes from flame as being only modestly
 warm: this light is a corporeal substance but from it there shines
 forth that other "light" which, though it carries the same name, we
 pronounce incorporeal, given forth from the first as its flower and
 radiance, the veritable "incandescent body." Plato's word earthy is
 commonly taken in too depreciatory a sense: he is thinking 
 of earth as
 the principle of solidity; we are apt to ignore his distinctions and
 think of the concrete clay.
 
 Fire of this order, giving forth this purest light, 
 belongs to the
 upper realm, and there its seat is fixed by nature; but we must not,
 on that account, suppose the flame of earth to be associated with
 the beings of that higher sphere.
 
 No: the flame of this world, once it has attained a certain
 height, is extinguished by the currents of air opposed to it.
 Moreover, as it carries an earthy element on its upward path, it is
 weighed downwards and cannot reach those loftier regions. It comes
 to a stand somewhere below the moon- making the air at that point
 subtler- and its flame, if any flame can persist, is subdued and
 softened, and no longer retains its first intensity, but gives out
 only what radiance it reflects from the light above.
 
 And it is that loftier light- falling variously upon the 
 stars; to
 each in a certain proportion- that gives them their characteristic
 differences, as well in magnitude as in colour; just such light
 constitutes also the still higher heavenly bodies which, 
 however, like
 clear air, are invisible because of the subtle texture and 
 unresisting
 transparency of their material substance and also by their very
 distance.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. Now: given a light of this degree, remaining in the upper
 sphere at its appointed station, pure light in purest place, 
 what mode
 of outflow from it can be conceived possible?
 
 Such a Kind is not so constituted as to flow downwards of its
 own accord; and there exists in those regions no power to force it
 down. Again, body in contact with soul must always be very different
 from body left to itself; the bodily substance of the 
 heavens has that
 contact and will show that difference.
 
 Besides, the corporeal substance nearest to the heavens would be
 air or fire: air has no destructive quality; fire would be powerless
 there since it could not enter into effective contact: in its very
 rush it would change before its attack could be felt; and, apart
 from that, it is of the lesser order, no match for what it would be
 opposing in those higher regions.
 
 Again, fire acts by imparting heat: now it cannot be the 
 source of
 heat to what is already hot by nature; and anything it is to destroy
 must as a first condition be heated by it, must be brought to a
 pitch of heat fatal to the nature concerned.
 
 In sum, then, no outside body is necessary to the heavens to
 ensure their permanence- or to produce their circular movement, for
 it has never been shown that their natural path would be the straight
 line; on the contrary the heavens, by their nature, will either be
 motionless or move by circle; all other movement indicates outside
 compulsion. We cannot think, therefore, that the heavenly bodies
 stand in need of replenishment; we must not argue from earthly
 frames to those of the celestial system whose sustaining soul is not
 the same, whose space is not the same, whose conditions are not
 those which make restoration necessary in this realm of composite
 bodies always in flux: we must recognise that the changes that take
 place in bodies here represent a slipping-away from the being
 [a phenomenon not incident to the celestial sphere] and take place
 at the dictate of a Principle not dwelling in the higher regions, one
 not powerful enough to ensure the permanence of the existences in
 which it is exhibited, one which in its coming into being and in
 its generative act is but an imitation of an antecedent Kind, and,
 as we have shown, cannot at every point possess the unchangeable
 identity of the Intellectual Realm.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SECOND TRACTATE.
 
 
 THE HEAVENLY CIRCUIT.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. But whence that circular movement?
 
 In imitation of the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 And does this movement belong to the material part or to 
 the Soul?
 Can we account for it on the ground that the Soul has itself at once
 for centre and for the goal to which it must be ceaselessly 
 moving; or
 that, being self-centred it is not of unlimited extension [and
 consequently must move ceaselessly to be omnipresent], and that its
 revolution carries the material mass with it?
 
 If the Soul had been the moving power [by any such semi-physical
 action] it would be so no longer; it would have accomplished the act
 of moving and have brought the universe to rest; there would 
 be an end
 of this endless revolution.
 
 In fact the Soul must be in repose or at least cannot 
 have spatial
 movement; how then, having itself a movement of quite another order,
 could it communicate spatial movement?
 
 But perhaps the circular movement [of the Kosmos as soul 
 and body]
 is not spatial or is spatial not primarily but only incidentally.
 
 What, by this explanation, would be the essential movement of
 the kosmic soul?
 
 A movement towards itself, the movement of self-awareness, of
 self-intellection, of the living of its life, the movement of its
 reaching to all things so that nothing shall lie outside of it,
 nothing anywhere but within its scope.
 
 The dominant in a living thing is what compasses it entirely and
 makes it a unity.
 
 If the Soul has no motion of any kind, it would not vitally
 compass the Kosmos nor would the Kosmos, a thing of body, keep its
 content alive, for the life of body is movement.
 
 Any spatial motion there is will be limited; it will be not that
 of Soul untrammelled but that of a material frame ensouled, an
 animated organism; the movement will be partly of body, partly of
 Soul, the body tending to the straight line which its nature
 imposes, the Soul restraining it; the resultant will be the 
 compromise
 movement of a thing at once carried forward and at rest.
 
 But supposing that the circular movement is to be attributed to
 the body, how is it to be explained, since all body, including fire
 [which constitutes the heavens] has straightforward motion?
 
 The answer is that forthright movement is maintained only
 pending arrival at the place for which the moving thing is destined:
 where a thing is ordained to be, there it seeks, of its nature, to
 come for its rest; its motion is its tendence to its appointed place.
 
 Then, since the fire of the sidereal system has attained 
 its goal,
 why does it not stay at rest?
 
 Evidently because the very nature of fire is to be mobile: if it
 did not take the curve, its straight line would finally fling it
 outside the universe: the circular course, then, is imperative.
 
 But this would imply an act of providence?
 
 Not quite: rather its own act under providence; attaining to
 that realm, it must still take the circular course by its indwelling
 nature; for it seeks the straight path onwards but finds no further
 space and is driven back so that it recoils on the only 
 course left to
 it: there is nothing beyond; it has reached the ultimate; it runs
 its course in the regions it occupies, itself its own sphere, not
 destined to come to rest there, existing to move.
 
 Further, the centre of a circle [and therefore of the Kosmos] is
 distinctively a point of rest: if the circumference outside were not
 in motion, the universe would be no more than one vast centre. And
 movement around the centre is all the more to be expected in the
 case of a living thing whose nature binds it within a body. Such
 motion alone can constitute its impulse towards its centre: it
 cannot coincide with the centre, for then there would be no circle;
 since this may not be, it whirls about it; so only can it indulge
 its tendence.
 
 If, on the other hand, the Kosmic circuit is due to the Soul, we
 are not to think of a painful driving [wearing it down at last]; the
 soul does not use violence or in any way thwart nature, for "Nature"
 is no other than the custom the All-Soul has established.
 Omnipresent in its entirety, incapable of division, the Soul of the
 universe communicates that quality of universal presence to the
 heavens, too, in their degree, the degree, that is, of pursuing
 universality and advancing towards it.
 
 If the Soul halted anywhere, there the Kosmos, too, brought so
 far, would halt: but the Soul encompasses all, and so the Kosmos
 moves, seeking everything.
 
 Yet never to attain?
 
 On the contrary this very motion is its eternal attainment.
 
 Or, better; the Soul is ceaselessly leading the Kosmos towards
 itself: the continuous attraction communicates a continuous
 movement- not to some outside space but towards the Soul and in the
 one sphere with it, not in the straight line [which would ultimately
 bring the moving body outside and below the Soul], but in the
 curving course in which the moving body at every stage possesses the
 Soul that is attracting it and bestowing itself upon it.
 
 If the soul were stationary, that is if [instead of 
 presiding over
 a Kosmos] it dwelt wholly and solely in the realm in which every
 member is at rest, motion would be unknown; but, since the 
 Soul is not
 fixed in some one station There, the Kosmos must travel to 
 every point
 in quest of it, and never outside it: in a circle, therefore.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. And what of lower things? [Why have they not this motion?]
 
 [Their case is very different]: the single thing here is not an
 all but a part and limited to a given segment of space; that other
 realm is all, is space, so to speak, and is subject to no 
 hindrance or
 control, for in itself it is all that is.
 
 And men?
 
 As a self, each is a personal whole, no doubt; but as member of
 the universe, each is a partial thing.
 
 But if, wherever the circling body be, it possesses the 
 Soul, what
 need of the circling?
 
 Because everywhere it finds something else besides the 
 Soul [which
 it desires to possess alone].
 
 The circular movement would be explained, too, if the 
 Soul's power
 may be taken as resident at its centre.
 
 Here, however, we must distinguish between a centre in reference
 to the two different natures, body and Soul.
 
 In body, centre is a point of place; in Soul it is a source, the
 source of some other nature. The word, which without qualification
 would mean the midpoint of a spheric mass, may serve in the double
 reference; and, as in a material mass so in the Soul, there must be
 a centre, that around which the object, Soul or material mass,
 revolves.
 
 The Soul exists in revolution around God to whom it clings in
 love, holding itself to the utmost of its power near to Him as the
 Being on which all depends; and since it cannot coincide with God it
 circles about Him.
 
 Why then do not all souls [i.e., the lower, also, as those of
 men and animals] thus circle about the Godhead?
 
 Every Soul does in its own rank and place.
 
 And why not our very bodies, also?
 
 Because the forward path is characteristic of body and 
 because all
 the body's impulses are to other ends and because what in us is of
 this circling nature is hampered in its motion by the clay it bears
 with it, while in the higher realm everything flows on its course,
 lightly and easily, with nothing to check it, once there is any
 principle of motion in it at all.
 
 And it may very well be that even in us the Spirit which dwells
 with the Soul does thus circle about the divinity. For since God is
 omnipresent the Soul desiring perfect union must take the circular
 course: God is not stationed.
 
 Similarly Plato attributes to the stars not only the spheric
 movement belonging to the universe as a whole but also to each a
 revolution around their common centre; each- not by way of 
 thought but
 by links of natural necessity- has in its own place taken hold of
 God and exults.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. The truth may be resumed in this way:
 
 There is a lowest power of the Soul, a nearest to earth, and
 this is interwoven throughout the entire universe: another phase
 possesses sensation, while yet another includes the Reason which is
 concerned with the objects of sensation: this higher phase holds
 itself to the spheres, poised towards the Above but hovering over
 the lesser Soul and giving forth to it an effluence which makes it
 more intensely vital.
 
 The lower Soul is moved by the higher which, besides encircling
 and supporting it, actually resides in whatsoever part of it has
 thrust upwards and attained the spheres. The lower then, ringed
 round by the higher and answering its call, turns and tends towards
 it; and this upward tension communicates motion to the material
 frame in which it is involved: for if a single point in a 
 spheric mass
 is in any degree moved, without being drawn away from the rest, it
 moves the whole, and the sphere is set in motion. Something of the
 same kind happens in the case of our bodies: the unspatial 
 movement of
 the Soul- in happiness, for instance, or at the idea of some
 pleasant event- sets up a spatial movement in the body: the Soul,
 attaining in its own region some good which increases its sense of
 life, moves towards what pleases it; and so, by force of the union
 established in the order of nature, it moves the body, in the body's
 region, that is in space.
 
 As for that phase of the Soul in which sensation is vested, it,
 too, takes its good from the Supreme above itself and moves,
 rejoicingly, in quest of it: and since the object of its desire is
 everywhere, it too ranges always through the entire scope of the
 universe.
 
 The Intellectual-Principle has no such progress in any 
 region; its
 movement is a stationary act, for it turns upon itself.
 
 And this is why the All, circling as it does, is at the same
 time at rest.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THIRD TRACTATE.
 
 
 ARE THE STARS CAUSES?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. That the circuit of the stars indicates definite 
 events to come
 but without being the cause direct of all that happens, has been
 elsewhere affirmed, and proved by some modicum of argument: but the
 subject demands more precise and detailed investigation for to take
 the one view rather than the other is of no small moment.
 
 The belief is that the planets in their courses actually produce
 not merely such conditions as poverty, wealth, health and 
 sickness but
 even ugliness and beauty and, gravest of all, vices and 
 virtue and the
 very acts that spring from these qualities, the definite doings of
 each moment of virtue or vice. We are to suppose the stars to be
 annoyed with men- and upon matters in which men, moulded to what
 they are by the stars themselves, can surely do them no wrong.
 
 They will be distributing what pass for their good gifts, not
 out of kindness towards the recipients but as they themselves are
 affected pleasantly or disagreeably at the various points of their
 course; so that they must be supposed to change their plans as they
 stand at their zeniths or are declining.
 
 More absurdly still, some of them are supposed to be 
 malicious and
 others to be helpful, and yet the evil stars will bestow favours and
 the benevolent act harshly: further, their action alters as they see
 each other or not, so that, after all, they possess no 
 definite nature
 but vary according to their angles of aspect; a star is 
 kindly when it
 sees one of its fellows but changes at sight of another: and there
 is even a distinction to be made in the seeing as it occurs in this
 figure or in that. Lastly, all acting together, the fused 
 influence is
 different again from that of each single star, just as the 
 blending of
 distinct fluids gives a mixture unlike any of them.
 
 Since these opinions and others of the same order are prevalent,
 it will be well to examine them carefully one by one, beginning with
 the fundamental question:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Are these planets to be thought of as soulless or unsouled?
 
 Suppose them, first, to be without Soul.
 
 In that case they can purvey only heat or cold- if cold from the
 stars can be thought of- that is to say, any communication from them
 will affect only our bodily nature, since all they have to 
 communicate
 to us is merely corporeal. This implies that no considerable change
 can be caused in the bodies affected since emanations merely 
 corporeal
 cannot differ greatly from star to star, and must, moreover, blend
 upon earth into one collective resultant: at most the differences
 would be such as depend upon local position, upon nearness or
 farness with regard to the centre of influence. This reasoning, of
 course, is as valid of any cold emanation there may be as of 
 the warm.
 
 Now, what is there in such corporeal action to account for the
 various classes and kinds of men, learned and illiterate, scholars
 as against orators, musicians as against people of other
 professions? Can a power merely physical make rich or poor? Can it
 bring about such conditions as in no sense depend upon the 
 interaction
 of corporeal elements? Could it, for example, bring a man such and
 such a brother, father, son, or wife, give him a stroke of good
 fortune at a particular moment, or make him generalissimo or king?
 
 Next, suppose the stars to have life and mind and to be
 effective by deliberate purpose.
 
 In that case, what have they suffered from us that they 
 should, in
 free will, do us hurt, they who are established in a divine place,
 themselves divine? There is nothing in their nature of what makes
 men base, nor can our weal or woe bring them the slightest good or
 ill.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Possibly, however, they act not by choice but under stress of
 their several positions and collective figures?
 
 But if position and figure determined their action each several
 one would necessarily cause identical effects with every other on
 entering any given place or pattern.
 
 And that raises the question what effect for good or bad can be
 produced upon any one of them by its transit in the parallel of this
 or that section of the Zodiac circle- for they are not in 
 the Zodiacal
 figure itself but considerably beneath it especially since, whatever
 point they touch, they are always in the heavens.
 
 It is absurd to think that the particular grouping under which a
 star passes can modify either its character or its earthward
 influences. And can we imagine it altered by its own 
 progression as it
 rises, stands at centre, declines? Exultant when at centre; dejected
 or enfeebled in declension; some raging as they rise and growing
 benignant as they set, while declension brings out the best in one
 among them; surely this cannot be?
 
 We must not forget that invariably every star, considered in
 itself, is at centre with regard to some one given group and in
 decline with regard to another and vice versa; and, very 
 certainly, it
 is not at once happy and sad, angry and kindly. There is no 
 reasonable
 escape in representing some of them as glad in their setting, others
 in their rising: they would still be grieving and glad at one and
 the same time.
 
 Further, why should any distress of theirs work harm to us?
 
 No: we cannot think of them as grieving at all or as being
 cheerful upon occasions: they must be continuously serene, happy in
 the good they enjoy and the Vision before them. Each lives its own
 free life; each finds its Good in its own Act; and this Act is not
 directed towards us.
 
 Like the birds of augury, the living beings of the 
 heavens, having
 no lot or part with us, may serve incidentally to foreshow 
 the future,
 but they have absolutely no main function in our regard.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. It is again not in reason that a particular star should be
 gladdened by seeing this or that other while, in a second 
 couple, such
 an aspect is distressing: what enmities can affect such beings? what
 causes of enmity can there be among them?
 
 And why should there be any difference as a given star sees
 certain others from the corner of a triangle or in opposition or at
 the angle of a square?
 
 Why, again, should it see its fellow from some one given
 position and yet, in the next Zodiacal figure, not see it, though
 the two are actually nearer?
 
 And, the cardinal question; by what conceivable process 
 could they
 affect what is attributed to them? How explain either the action of
 any single star independently or, still more perplexing, the 
 effect of
 their combined intentions?
 
 We cannot think of them entering into compromises, each 
 renouncing
 something of its efficiency and their final action in our regard
 amounting to a concerted plan.
 
 No one star would suppress the contribution of another, nor
 would star yield to star and shape its conduct under suasion.
 
 As for the fancy that while one is glad when it enters another's
 region, the second is vexed when in its turn it occupies the place
 of the first, surely this is like starting with the 
 supposition of two
 friends and then going on to talk of one being attracted to the
 other who, however, abhors the first.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. When they tell us that a certain cold star is more benevolent
 to us in proportion as it is further away, they clearly make its
 harmful influence depend upon the coldness of its nature; and yet it
 ought to be beneficent to us when it is in the opposed Zodiacal
 figures.
 
 When the cold planet, we are told, is in opposition to the cold,
 both become meanacing: but the natural effect would be a compromise.
 
 And we are asked to believe that one of them is happy by day and
 grows kindly under the warmth, while another, of a fiery nature, is
 most cheerful by night- as if it were not always day to 
 them, light to
 them, and as if the first one could be darkened by night at 
 that great
 distance above the earth's shadow.
 
 Then there is the notion that the moon, in conjunction with a
 certain star, is softened at her full but is malignant in the same
 conjunction when her light has waned; yet, if anything of this order
 could be admitted, the very opposite would be the case. For when she
 is full to us she must be dark on the further hemisphere, that is to
 that star which stands above her; and when dark to us she is full to
 that other star, upon which only then, on the contrary, does she
 look with her light. To the moon itself, in fact, it can make no
 difference in what aspect she stands, for she is always lit on the
 upper or on the under half: to the other star, the warmth from the
 moon, of which they speak, might make a difference; but that warmth
 would reach it precisely when the moon is without light to us; at
 its darkest to us it is full to that other, and therefore
 beneficent. The darkness of the moon to us is of moment to the
 earth, but brings no trouble to the planet above. That planet, it is
 alleged, can give no help on account of its remoteness and therefore
 seems less well disposed; but the moon at its full suffices to the
 lower realm so that the distance of the other is of no importance.
 When the moon, though dark to us, is in aspect with the 
 Fiery Star she
 is held to be favourable: the reason alleged is that the 
 force of Mars
 is all-sufficient since it contains more fire than it needs.
 
 The truth is that while the material emanations from the living
 beings of the heavenly system are of various degrees of 
 warmth- planet
 differing from planet in this respect- no cold comes from them: the
 nature of the space in which they have their being is voucher for
 that.
 
 The star known as Jupiter includes a due measure of fire [and
 warmth], in this resembling the Morning-star and therefore seeming
 to be in alliance with it. In aspect with what is known as the Fiery
 Star, Jupiter is beneficent by virtue of the mixing of influences:
 in aspect with Saturn unfriendly by dint of distance. Mercury, it
 would seem, is indifferent whatever stars it be in aspect 
 with; for it
 adopts any and every character.
 
 But all the stars are serviceable to the Universe, and therefore
 can stand to each other only as the service of the Universe demands,
 in a harmony like that observed in the members of any one 
 animal form.
 They exist essentially for the purpose of the Universe, just as the
 gall exists for the purposes of the body as a whole not less than
 for its own immediate function: it is to be the inciter of the
 animal spirits but without allowing the entire organism and its own
 especial region to run riot. Some such balance of function was
 indispensable in the All- bitter with sweet. There must be
 differentiation- eyes and so forth- but all the members will be in
 sympathy with the entire animal frame to which they belong. Only so
 can there be a unity and a total harmony.
 
 And in such a total, analogy will make every part a Sign.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. But that this same Mars, or Aphrodite, in certain aspects
 should cause adulteries- as if they could thus, through the agency
 of human incontinence, satisfy their own mutual desires- is 
 not such a
 notion the height of unreason? And who could accept the fancy that
 their happiness comes from their seeing each other in this or that
 relative position and not from their own settled nature?
 
 Again: countless myriads of living beings are born and 
 continue to
 be: to minister continuously to every separate one of these; to make
 them famous, rich, poor, lascivious; to shape the active 
 tendencies of
 every single one- what kind of life is this for the stars, how could
 they possibly handle a task so huge?
 
 They are to watch, we must suppose, the rising of each several
 constellation and upon that signal to act; such a one, they see, has
 risen by so many degrees, representing so many of the periods of its
 upward path; they reckon on their fingers at what moment they must
 take the action which, executed prematurely, would be out of order:
 and in the sum, there is no One Being controlling the entire scheme;
 all is made over to the stars singly, as if there were no Sovereign
 Unity, standing as source of all the forms of Being in subordinate
 association with it, and delegating to the separate members, in
 their appropriate Kinds, the task of accomplishing its purposes and
 bringing its latent potentiality into act.
 
 This is a separatist theory, tenable only by minds 
 ignorant of the
 nature of a Universe which has a ruling principle and a first cause
 operative downwards through every member.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. But, if the stars announce the future- as we hold of 
 many other
 things also- what explanation of the cause have we to offer? What
 explains the purposeful arrangement thus implied? Obviously, unless
 the particular is included under some general principle of order,
 there can be no signification.
 
 We may think of the stars as letters perpetually being inscribed
 on the heavens or inscribed once for all and yet moving as 
 they pursue
 the other tasks allotted to them: upon these main tasks will follow
 the quality of signifying, just as the one principle underlying any
 living unit enables us to reason from member to member, so that for
 example we may judge of character and even of perils and 
 safeguards by
 indications in the eyes or in some other part of the body. If these
 parts of us are members of a whole, so are we: in different ways the
 one law applies.
 
 All teems with symbol; the wise man is the man who in any one
 thing can read another, a process familiar to all of us in not a few
 examples of everyday experience.
 
 But what is the comprehensive principle of co-ordination?
 Establish this and we have a reasonable basis for the divination,
 not only by stars but also by birds and other animals, from which we
 derive guidance in our varied concerns.
 
 All things must be enchained; and the sympathy and
 correspondence obtaining in any one closely knit organism must
 exist, first, and most intensely, in the All. There must be one
 principle constituting this unit of many forms of life and enclosing
 the several members within the unity, while at the same time,
 precisely as in each thing of detail the parts too have each a
 definite function, so in the All each several member must 
 have its own
 task- but more markedly so since in this case the parts are 
 not merely
 members but themselves Alls, members of the loftier Kind.
 
 Thus each entity takes its origin from one Principle and,
 therefore, while executing its own function, works in with 
 every other
 member of that All from which its distinct task has by no 
 means cut it
 off: each performs its act, each receives something from the others,
 every one at its own moment bringing its touch of sweet or 
 bitter. And
 there is nothing undesigned, nothing of chance, in all the process:
 all is one scheme of differentiation, starting from the Firsts and
 working itself out in a continuous progression of Kinds.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. Soul, then, in the same way, is intent upon a task of its
 own; alike in its direct course and in its divagation it is the
 cause of all by its possession of the Thought of the First
 Principle: thus a Law of Justice goes with all that exists in the
 Universe which, otherwise, would be dissolved, and is perdurable
 because the entire fabric is guided as much by the orderliness as by
 the power of the controlling force. And in this order the stars, as
 being no minor members of the heavenly system, are co-operators
 contributing at once to its stately beauty and to its symbolic
 quality. Their symbolic power extends to the entire realm of sense,
 their efficacy only to what they patently do.
 
 For our part, nature keeps us upon the work of the Soul 
 as long as
 we are not wrecked in the multiplicity of the Universe: once 
 thus sunk
 and held we pay the penalty, which consists both in the fall itself
 and in the lower rank thus entailed upon us: riches and poverty are
 caused by the combinations of external fact.
 
 And what of virtue and vice?
 
 That question has been amply discussed elsewhere: in a word,
 virtue is ours by the ancient staple of the Soul; vice is due to the
 commerce of a Soul with the outer world.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. This brings us to the Spindle-destiny, spun according to the
 ancients by the Fates. To Plato the Spindle represents the
 co-operation of the moving and the stable elements of the kosmic
 circuit: the Fates with Necessity, Mother of the Fates, manipulate
 it and spin at the birth of every being, so that all comes into
 existence through Necessity.
 
 In the Timaeus, the creating God bestows the essential of the
 Soul, but it is the divinities moving in the kosmos [the stars] that
 infuse the powerful affections holding from Necessity our impulse
 and our desire, our sense of pleasure and of pain- and that lower
 phase of the Soul in which such experiences originate. By this
 statement our personality is bound up with the stars, whence our
 Soul [as total of Principle and affections] takes shape; and we are
 set under necessity at our very entrance into the world: our
 temperament will be of the stars' ordering, and so, therefore, the
 actions which derive from temperament, and all the experiences of a
 nature shaped to impressions.
 
 What, after all this, remains to stand for the "We"?
 
 The "We" is the actual resultant of a Being whose nature 
 includes,
 with certain sensibilities, the power of governing them. Cut 
 off as we
 are by the nature of the body, God has yet given us, in the midst of
 all this evil, virtue the unconquerable, meaningless in a state of
 tranquil safety but everything where its absence would be peril of
 fall.
 
 Our task, then, is to work for our liberation from this sphere,
 severing ourselves from all that has gathered about us; the total
 man is to be something better than a body ensouled- the 
 bodily element
 dominant with a trace of Soul running through it and a resultant
 life-course mainly of the body- for in such a combination all is, in
 fact, bodily. There is another life, emancipated, whose quality is
 progression towards the higher realm, towards the good and divine,
 towards that Principle which no one possesses except by deliberate
 usage but so may appropriate, becoming, each personally, the higher,
 the beautiful, the Godlike, and living, remote, in and by It- unless
 one choose to go bereaved of that higher Soul and therefore, to live
 fate-bound, no longer profiting, merely, by the significance of the
 sidereal system but becoming as it were a part sunken in it and
 dragged along with the whole thus adopted.
 
 For every human Being is of twofold character; there is that
 compromise-total and there is the Authentic Man: and it is 
 so with the
 Kosmos as a whole; it is in the one phase a conjunction of 
 body with a
 certain form of the Soul bound up in body; in the other phase it is
 the Universal Soul, that which is not itself embodied but 
 flashes down
 its rays into the embodied Soul: and the same twofold quality
 belongs to the Sun and the other members of the heavenly system.
 
 To the remoter Soul, the pure, sun and stars communicate no
 baseness. In their efficacy upon the [material] All, they 
 act as parts
 of it, as ensouled bodies within it; and they act only upon what is
 partial; body is the agent while, at the same time, it becomes the
 vehicle through which is transmitted something of the star's will
 and of that authentic Soul in it which is steadfastly in 
 contemplation
 of the Highest.
 
 But [with every allowance to the lower forces] all follows
 either upon that Highest or rather upon the Beings about It- we may
 think of the Divine as a fire whose outgoing warmth pervades the
 Universe- or upon whatsoever is transmitted by the one Soul [the
 divine first Soul] to the other, its Kin [the Soul of any particular
 being]. All that is graceless is admixture. For the Universe is in
 truth a thing of blend, and if we separate from it that separable
 Soul, the residue is little. The All is a God when the divine Soul
 is counted in with it; "the rest," we read, "is a mighty spirit and
 its ways are subdivine."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. If all this be true, we must at once admit signification,
 though, neither singly nor collectively, can we ascribe to the stars
 any efficacy except in what concerns the [material] All and 
 in what is
 of their own function.
 
 We must admit that the Soul before entering into birth presents
 itself bearing with it something of its own, for it could never
 touch body except under stress of a powerful inner impulse; we must
 admit some element of chance around it from its very entry, since
 the moment and conditions are determined by the kosmic 
 circuit: and we
 must admit some effective power in that circuit itself; it is
 co-operative, and completes of its own act the task that belongs to
 the All of which everything in the circuit takes the rank 
 and function
 of a part.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. And we must remember that what comes from the supernals does
 not enter into the recipients as it left the source; fire, for
 instance, will be duller; the loving instinct will degenerate and
 issue in ugly forms of the passion; the vital energy in a subject
 not so balanced as to display the mean of manly courage, 
 will come out
 as either ferocity or faint-heartedness; and ambition... in love...;
 and the instinct towards good sets up the pursuit of semblant
 beauty; intellectual power at its lowest produces the extreme of
 wickedness, for wickedness is a miscalculating effort towards
 Intelligence.
 
 Any such quality, modified at best from its supreme form,
 deteriorates again within itself: things of any kind that approach
 from above, altered by merely leaving their source change further
 still by their blending with bodies, with Matter, with each other.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. All that thus proceeds from the supernal combines 
 into a unity
 and every existing entity takes something from this blended infusion
 so that the result is the thing itself plus some quality. The
 effluence does not make the horse but adds something to it; for
 horse comes by horse, and man by man: the sun plays its part no
 doubt in the shaping, but the man has his origin in the
 Human-Principle. Outer things have their effect, sometimes 
 to hurt and
 sometimes to help; like a father, they often contribute to good but
 sometimes also to harm; but they do not wrench the human being from
 the foundations of its nature; though sometimes Matter is the
 dominant, and the human principle takes the second place so 
 that there
 is a failure to achieve perfection; the Ideal has been attenuated.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. Of phenomena of this sphere some derive from the Kosmic
 Circuit and some not: we must take them singly and mark them off,
 assigning to each its origin.
 
 The gist of the whole matter lies in the consideration that Soul
 governs this All by the plan contained in the Reason-Principle and
 plays in the All exactly the part of the particular 
 principle which in
 every living-thing forms the members of the organism and adjusts
 them to the unity of which they are portions; the entire force of
 the Soul is represented in the All, but, in the parts, Soul 
 is present
 only in proportion to the degree of essential reality held by each
 of such partial objects. Surrounding every separate entity there are
 other entities, whose approach will sometimes be hostile and 
 sometimes
 helpful to the purpose of its nature; but to the All taken in its
 length and breadth each and every separate existent is an adjusted
 part, holding its own characteristic and yet contributing by its own
 native tendency to the entire life-history of the Universe.
 
 The soulless parts of the All are merely instruments; all their
 action is effected, so to speak, under a compulsion from outside
 themselves.
 
 The ensouled fall into two classes. The one kind has a motion of
 its own, but haphazard like that of horses between the shafts but
 before their driver sets the course; they are set right by the whip.
 In the Living-Being possessed of Reason, the 
 nature-principle includes
 the driver; where the driver is intelligent, it takes in the main a
 straight path to a set end. But both classes are members of the All
 and co-operate towards the general purpose.
 
 The greater and most valuable among them have an important
 operation over a wide range: their contribution towards the life of
 the whole consists in acting, not in being acted upon; others, but
 feebly equipped for action, are almost wholly passive; there is an
 intermediate order whose members contain within themselves a 
 principle
 of productivity and activity and make themselves very effective in
 many spheres or ways and yet serve also by their passivity.
 
 Thus the All stands as one all-complete Life, whose members, to
 the measure in which each contains within itself the Highest, effect
 all that is high and noble: and the entire scheme must be
 subordinate to its Dirigeant as an army to its general, "following
 upon Zeus"- it has been said- "as he proceeds towards the 
 Intelligible
 Kind."
 
 Secondary in the All are those of its parts which possess a less
 exalted nature just as in us the members rank lower than the 
 Soul; and
 so all through, there is a general analogy between the things of the
 All and our own members- none of quite equal rank.
 
 All living things, then- all in the heavens and all elsewhere-
 fall under the general Reason-Principle of the All- they have been
 made parts with a view to the whole: not one of these parts, however
 exalted, has power to effect any alteration of these 
 Reason-Principles
 or of things shaped by them and to them; some modification one part
 may work upon another, whether for better or for worse; but there is
 no power that can wrest anything outside of its distinct nature.
 
 The part effecting such a modification for the worse may act in
 several ways.
 
 It may set up some weakness restricted to the material frame. Or
 it may carry the weakness through to the sympathetic Soul 
 which by the
 medium of the material frame, become a power to debasement, has been
 delivered over, though never in its essence, to the inferior order
 of being. Or, in the case of a material frame ill-organized, it may
 check all such action [of the Soul] upon the material frame 
 as demands
 a certain collaboration in the part acted upon: thus a lyre may be
 so ill-strung as to be incapable of the melodic exactitude necessary
 to musical effect.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. What of poverty and riches, glory and power?
 
 In the case of inherited fortune, the stars merely 
 announce a rich
 man, exactly as they announce the high social standing of the child
 born to a distinguished house.
 
 Wealth may be due to personal activity: in this case if the body
 has contributed, part of the effect is due to whatever has 
 contributed
 towards the physical powers, first the parents and then, if place
 has had its influence, sky and earth; if the body has borne 
 no part of
 the burden, then the success, and all the splendid accompaniments
 added by the Recompensers, must be attributed to virtue exclusively.
 If fortune has come by gift from the good, then the source of the
 wealth is, again, virtue: if by gift from the evil, but to a
 meritorious recipient, then the credit must be given to the action
 of the best in them: if the recipient is himself unprincipled, the
 wealth must be attributed primarily to the very wickedness and to
 whatsoever is responsible for the wickedness, while the 
 givers bear an
 equal share in the wrong.
 
 When the success is due to labour, tillage for example, 
 it must be
 put down to the tiller, with all his environment as contributory. In
 the case of treasure-trove, something from the All has entered into
 action; and if this be so, it will be foreshown- since all 
 things make
 a chain, so that we can speak of things universally. Money 
 is lost: if
 by robbery, the blame lies with the robber and the native principle
 guiding him: if by shipwreck, the cause is the chain of 
 events. As for
 good fame, it is either deserved and then is due to the services
 done and to the merit of those appraising them, or it is undeserved,
 and then must be attributed to the injustice of those making the
 award. And the same principle holds is regards power- for this also
 may be rightly or unrightly placed- it depends either upon the merit
 of the dispensers of place or upon the man himself who has effected
 his purpose by the organization of supporters or in many other
 possible ways. Marriages, similarly, are brought about either by
 choice or by chance interplay of circumstance. And births are
 determined by marriages: the child is moulded true to type when all
 goes well; otherwise it is marred by some inner detriment, something
 due to the mother personally or to an environment 
 unfavourable to that
 particular conception.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. According to Plato, lots and choice play a part [in the
 determination of human conditions] before the Spindle of Necessity
 is turned; that once done, only the Spindle-destiny is 
 valid; it fixes
 the chosen conditions irretrievably since the elected
 guardian-spirit becomes accessory to their accomplishment.
 
 But what is the significance of the Lots?
 
 By the Lots we are to understand birth into the conditions
 actually existent in the All at the particular moment of each entry
 into body, birth into such and such a physical frame, from such and
 such parents, in this or that place, and generally all that in our
 phraseology is the External.
 
 For Particulars and Universals alike it is established 
 that to the
 first of those known as the Fates, to Clotho the Spinner, must be
 due the unity and as it were interweaving of all that 
 exists: Lachesis
 presides over the Lots: to Atropos must necessarily belong 
 the conduct
 of mundane events.
 
 Of men, some enter into life as fragments of the All, bound to
 that which is external to themselves: they are victims of a sort of
 fascination, and are hardly, or not at all, themselves: but others
 mastering all this- straining, so to speak, by the head towards the
 Higher, to what is outside even the Soul- preserve still the
 nobility and the ancient privilege of the Soul's essential being.
 
 For certainly we cannot think of the Soul as a thing whose
 nature is just a sum of impressions from outside- as if it, alone,
 of all that exists, had no native character.
 
 No: much more than all else, the Soul, possessing the Idea which
 belongs to a Principle, must have as its native wealth many powers
 serving to the activities of its Kind. It is an 
 Essential-Existent and
 with this Existence must go desire and act and the tendency towards
 some good.
 
 While body and soul stand one combined thing, there is a joint
 nature, a definite entity having definite functions and employments;
 but as soon as any Soul is detached, its employments are kept apart,
 its very own: it ceases to take the body's concerns to itself: it
 has vision now: body and soul stand widely apart.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. The question arises what phase of the Soul enters into the
 union for the period of embodiment and what phase remains distinct,
 what is separable and what necessarily interlinked, and in general
 what the Living-Being is.
 
 On all this there has been a conflict of teaching: the 
 matter must
 be examined later on from quite other considerations than occupy us
 here. For the present let us explain in what sense we have described
 the All as the expressed idea of the Governing Soul.
 
 One theory might be that the Soul creates the particular
 entities in succession- man followed by horse and other animals
 domestic or wild: fire and earth, though, first of all- that it
 watches these creations acting upon each other whether to help or to
 harm, observes, and no more, the tangled web formed of all these
 strands, and their unfailing sequences; and that it makes no concern
 of the result beyond securing the reproduction of the primal
 living-beings, leaving them for the rest to act upon each other
 according to their definite natures.
 
 Another view makes the soul answerable for all that thus comes
 about, since its first creations have set up the entire enchainment.
 
 No doubt the Reason-Principle [conveyed by the Soul] covers all
 the action and experience of this realm: nothing happens, even here,
 by any form of haphazard; all follows a necessary order.
 
 Is everything, then, to be attributed to the act of the
 Reason-Principles?
 
 To their existence, no doubt, but not to their effective action;
 they exist and they know; or better, the Soul, which contains the
 engendering Reason-Principle, knows the results of all it has
 brought to pass. For whensoever similar factors meet and act in
 relation to each other, similar consequences must inevitably ensue:
 the Soul adopting or foreplanning the given conditions accomplishes
 the due outcome and links all into a total.
 
 All, then, is antecedent and resultant, each sequent becoming in
 turn an antecedent once it has taken its place among things. And
 perhaps this is a cause of progressive deterioration: men, for
 instance, are not as they were of old; by dint of interval and of
 the inevitable law, the Reason-Principles have ceded something to
 the characteristics of the Matter.
 
 But:
 
 The Soul watches the ceaselessly changing universe and 
 follows all
 the fate of all its works: this is its life, and it knows no respite
 from this care, but is ever labouring to bring about perfection,
 planning to lead all to an unending state of excellence- like a
 farmer, first sowing and planting and then constantly setting to
 rights where rainstorms and long frosts and high gales have played
 havoc.
 
 If such a conception of Soul be rejected as untenable, we are
 obliged to think that the Reason-Principles themselves foreknew or
 even contained the ruin and all the consequences of flaw.
 
 But then we would be imputing the creation of evil to the
 Reason-Principles, though the arts and their guiding principle do
 not include blundering, do not cover the inartistic, the destruction
 of the work of art.
 
 And here it will be objected that in All there is 
 nothing contrary
 to nature, nothing evil.
 
 Still, by the side of the better there exists also what is less
 good.
 
 Well, perhaps even the less good has its contributory 
 value in the
 All. Perhaps there is no need that everything be good. Contraries
 may co-operate; and without opposites there could be no ordered
 Universe: all living beings of the partial realm include contraries.
 The better elements are compelled into existence and moulded to
 their function by the Reason-Principle directly; the less good are
 potentially present in the Reason-Principles, actually present in
 the phenomena themselves; the Soul's power had reached its limit,
 and failed to bring the Reason-Principles into complete actuality
 since, amid the clash of these antecedent Principles, Matter had
 already from its own stock produced the less good.
 
 Yet, with all this, Matter is continuously overruled towards the
 better; so that out of the total of things- modified by Soul on the
 one hand and by Matter on the other hand, and on neither 
 hand as sound
 as in the Reason-Principles- there is, in the end, a Unity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. But these Reason-Principles, contained in the Soul, are they
 Thoughts?
 
 And if so, by what process does the Soul create in 
 accordance with
 these Thoughts?
 
 It is upon Matter that this act of the Reason is exercised; and
 what acts physically is not an intellectual operation or a 
 vision, but
 a power modifying matter, not conscious of it but merely acting upon
 it: the Reason-Principle, in other words, acts much like a force
 producing a figure or pattern upon water- that of a circle, suppose,
 where the formation of the ring is conditioned by something distinct
 from that force itself.
 
 If this is so, the prior puissance of the Soul [that 
 which conveys
 the Reason-Principles] must act by manipulating the other Soul, that
 which is united with Matter and has the generative function.
 
 But is this handling the result of calculation?
 
 Calculation implies reference. Reference, then, to something
 outside or to something contained within itself? If to its own
 content, there is no need of reasoning, which could not 
 itself perform
 the act of creation; creation is the operation of that phase of the
 Soul which contains Ideal-Principles; for that is its stronger
 puissance, its creative part.
 
 It creates, then, on the model of the Ideas; for, what it has
 received from the Intellectual-Principle it must pass on in turn.
 
 In sum, then, the Intellectual-Principle gives from itself to
 the Soul of the All which follows immediately upon it: this again
 gives forth from itself to its next, illuminated and imprinted by
 it; and that secondary Soul at once begins to create, as under
 order, unhindered in some of its creations, striving in 
 others against
 the repugnance of Matter.
 
 It has a creative power, derived; it is stored with
 Reason-Principles not the very originals: therefore it creates, but
 not in full accordance with the Principles from which it has been
 endowed: something enters from itself; and, plainly, this is 
 inferior.
 The issue then is something living, yes; but imperfect, hindering
 its own life, something very poor and reluctant and crude, 
 formed in a
 Matter that is the fallen sediment of the Higher Order, bitter and
 embittering. This is the Soul's contribution to the All.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. Are the evils in the Universe necessary because it 
 is of later
 origin than the Higher Sphere?
 
 Perhaps rather because without evil the All would be incomplete.
 For most or even all forms of evil serve the Universe- much as the
 poisonous snake has its use- though in most cases their function is
 unknown. Vice itself has many useful sides: it brings about much
 that is beautiful, in artistic creations for example, and it stirs
 us to thoughtful living, not allowing us to drowse in security.
 
 If all this is so, then [the secret of creation is that] the
 Soul of the All abides in contemplation of the Highest and Best,
 ceaselessly striving towards the Intelligible Kind and towards God:
 but, thus absorbing and filled full, it overflows- so to speak- and
 the image it gives forth, its last utterance towards the lower, will
 be the creative puissance.
 
 This ultimate phase, then, is the Maker, secondary to that
 aspect of the Soul which is primarily saturated from the Divine
 Intelligence. But the Creator above all is the 
 Intellectual-Principle,
 as giver, to the Soul that follows it, of those gifts whose traces
 exist in the Third Kind.
 
 Rightly, therefore, is this Kosmos described as an image
 continuously being imaged, the First and the Second Principles
 immobile, the Third, too, immobile essentially, but, accidentally
 and in Matter, having motion.
 
 For as long as divine Mind and Soul exist, the divine
 Thought-Forms will pour forth into that phase of the Soul: as long as
 there is a sun, all that streams from it will be some form of Light.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FOURTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 MATTER IN ITS TWO KINDS.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. By common agreement of all that have arrived at the
 conception of such a Kind, what is known as Matter is 
 understood to be
 a certain base, a recipient of Form-Ideas. Thus far all go the same
 way. But departure begins with the attempt to establish what this
 basic Kind is in itself, and how it is a recipient and of what.
 
 To a certain school, body-forms exclusively are the Real Beings;
 existence is limited to bodies; there is one only Matter, the stuff
 underlying the primal-constituents of the Universe: existence is
 nothing but this Matter: everything is some modification of this;
 the elements of the Universe are simply this Matter in a certain
 condition.
 
 The school has even the audacity to foist Matter upon the divine
 beings so that, finally, God himself becomes a mode of Matter- and
 this though they make it corporeal, describing it as a body void of
 quality, but a magnitude.
 
 Another school makes it incorporeal: among these, not 
 all hold the
 theory of one only Matter; some of them while they maintain the one
 Matter, in which the first school believes, the foundation of bodily
 forms, admit another, a prior, existing in the 
 divine-sphere, the base
 of the Ideas there and of the unembodied Beings.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. We are obliged, therefore, at the start, both to establish
 the existence of this other Kind and to examine its nature and the
 mode of its Being.
 
 Now if Matter must characteristically be undetermined, void of
 shape, while in that sphere of the Highest there can be nothing that
 lacks determination, nothing shapeless, there can be no Matter
 there. Further, if all that order is simplex, there can be no need
 of Matter, whose function is to join with some other element 
 to form a
 compound: it will be found of necessity in things of derived 
 existence
 and shifting nature- the signs which lead us to the notion of
 Matter- but it is unnecessary to the primal.
 
 And again, where could it have come from? whence did it take its
 being? If it is derived, it has a source: if it is eternal, then the
 Primal-Principles are more numerous than we thought, the Firsts are
 a meeting-ground. Lastly, if that Matter has been entered by 
 Idea, the
 union constitutes a body; and, so, there is Body in the Supreme.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Now it may be observed, first of all, that we cannot hold
 utterly cheap either the indeterminate, or even a Kind whose 
 very idea
 implies absence of form, provided only that it offer itself to its
 Priors and [through them] to the Highest Beings. We have the
 parallel of the Soul itself in its relation to the
 Intellectual-Principle and the Divine Reason, taking shape by these
 and led so to a nobler principle of form.
 
 Further, a compound in the Intellectual order is not to be
 confounded with a compound in the realm of Matter; the Divine
 Reasons are compounds and their Act is to produce a compound, namely
 that [lower] Nature which works towards Idea. And there is not only
 a difference of function; there is a still more notable difference
 of source. Then, too, the Matter of the realm of process ceaselessly
 changes its form: in the eternal, Matter is immutably one and the
 same, so that the two are diametrically opposites. The Matter of
 this realm is all things in turn, a new entity in every 
 separate case,
 so that nothing is permanent and one thing ceaselessly pushes
 another out of being: Matter has no identity here. In the 
 Intellectual
 it is all things at once: and therefore has nothing to 
 change into: it
 already and ever contains all. This means that not even in its own
 Sphere is the Matter there at any moment shapeless: no doubt that is
 true of the Matter here as well; but shape is held by a very 
 different
 right in the two orders of Matter.
 
 As to whether Matter is eternal or a thing of process, this will
 be clear when we are sure of its precise nature.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. The present existence of the Ideal-Forms has been
 demonstrated elsewhere: we take up our argument from that point.
 
 If, then, there is more than one of such forming Ideas, 
 there must
 of necessity be some character common to all and equally 
 some peculiar
 character in each keeping them distinct.
 
 This peculiar characteristic, this distinguishing difference, is
 the individual shape. But if shape, then there is the shaped, that
 in which the difference is lodged.
 
 There is, therefore, a Matter accepting the shape, a permanent
 substratum.
 
 Further, admitting that there is an Intelligible Realm beyond,
 of which this world is an image, then, since this world-compound is
 based on Matter, there must be Matter there also.
 
 And how can you predicate an ordered system without thinking of
 form, and how think of form apart from the notion of something in
 which the form is lodged?
 
 No doubt that Realm is, in the strict fact, utterly 
 without parts,
 but in some sense there is part there too. And in so far as these
 parts are really separate from each other, any such division and
 difference can be no other than a condition of Matter, of a
 something divided and differentiated: in so far as that realm,
 though without parts, yet consists of a variety of entities, these
 diverse entities, residing in a unity of which they are variations,
 reside in a Matter; for this unity, since it is also a 
 diversity, must
 be conceived of as varied and multiform; it must have been shapeless
 before it took the form in which variation occurs. For if we
 abstract from the Intellectual-Principle the variety and the
 particular shapes, the Reason-Principles and the Thoughts, what
 precedes these was something shapeless and undetermined, nothing of
 what is actually present there.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. It may be objected that the Intellectual-Principle possesses
 its content in an eternal conjunction so that the two make a perfect
 unity, and that thus there is no Matter there.
 
 But that argument would equally cancel the Matter present in the
 bodily forms of this realm: body without shape has never existed,
 always body achieved and yet always the two constituents. We
 discover these two- Matter and Idea- by sheer force of our reasoning
 which distinguishes continually in pursuit of the simplex, the
 irreducible, working on, until it can go no further, towards the
 ultimate in the subject of enquiry. And the ultimate of every
 partial-thing is its Matter, which, therefore, must be all darkness
 since light is a Reason-Principle. The Mind, too, as also a
 Reason-Principle, sees only in each particular object the
 Reason-Principle lodging there; anything lying below that it
 declares to lie below the light, to be therefore a thing of
 darkness, just as the eye, a thing of light, seeks light and colours
 which are modes of light, and dismisses all that is below the
 colours and hidden by them, as belonging to the order of the 
 darkness,
 which is the order of Matter.
 
 The dark element in the Intelligible, however, differs from that
 in the sense-world: so therefore does the Matter- as much as the
 forming-Idea presiding in each of the two realms. The Divine Matter,
 though it is the object of determination has, of its own nature, a
 life defined and intellectual; the Matter of this sphere 
 while it does
 accept determination is not living or intellective, but a dead thing
 decorated: any shape it takes is an image, exactly as the Base is an
 image. There on the contrary the shape is a real-existent as is the
 Base. Those that ascribe Real Being to Matter must be admitted to be
 right as long as they keep to the Matter of the Intelligible Realm:
 for the Base there is Being, or even, taken as an entirety with the
 higher that accompanies it, is illuminated Being.
 
 But does this Base, of the Intellectual Realm, possess eternal
 existence?
 
 The solution of that question is the same as for the Ideas.
 
 Both are engendered, in the sense that they have had a
 beginning, but unengendered in that this beginning is not in Time:
 they have a derived being but by an eternal derivation: they are
 not, like the Kosmos, always in process but, in the character of the
 Supernal, have their Being permanently. For that differentiation
 within the Intelligible which produces Matter has always existed and
 it is this cleavage which produces the Matter there: it is the first
 movement; and movement and differentiation are convertible 
 terms since
 the two things arose as one: this motion, this cleavage, 
 away from the
 first is indetermination [= Matter], needing The First to its
 determination which it achieves by its Return, remaining, until
 then, an Alienism, still lacking good; unlit by the Supernal. It is
 from the Divine that all light comes, and, until this be absorbed,
 no light in any recipient of light can be authentic; any light from
 elsewhere is of another order than the true.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. We are led thus to the question of receptivity in things of
 body.
 
 An additional proof that bodies must have some substratum
 different from themselves is found in the changing of the
 basic-constituents into one another. Notice that the destruction of
 the elements passing over is not complete- if it were we would have
 a Principle of Being wrecked in Non-being- nor does an engendered
 thing pass from utter non-being into Being: what happens is 
 that a new
 form takes the place of an old. There is, then, a stable 
 element, that
 which puts off one form to receive the form of the incoming entity.
 
 The same fact is clearly established by decay, a process
 implying a compound object; where there is decay there is a
 distinction between Matter and Form.
 
 And the reasoning which shows the destructible to be a 
 compound is
 borne out by practical examples of reduction: a drinking vessel is
 reduced to its gold, the gold to liquid; analogy forces us to
 believe that the liquid too is reducible.
 
 The basic-constituents of things must be either their 
 Form-Idea or
 that Primal Matter [of the Intelligible] or a compound of 
 the Form and
 Matter.
 
 Form-Idea, pure and simple, they cannot be: for without 
 Matter how
 could things stand in their mass and magnitude?
 
 Neither can they be that Primal Matter, for they are not
 indestructible.
 
 They must, therefore, consist of Matter and Form-Idea- Form for
 quality and shape, Matter for the base, indeterminate as being other
 than Idea.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Empedokles in identifying his "elements" with Matter 
 is refuted
 by their decay.
 
 Anaxagoras, in identifying his "primal-combination" with Matter-
 to which he allots no mere aptness to any and every nature or
 quality but the effective possession of all- withdraws in 
 this way the
 very Intellectual-Principle he had introduced; for this Mind 
 is not to
 him the bestower of shape, of Forming Idea; and it is co-aeval with
 Matter, not its prior. But this simultaneous existence is
 impossible: for if the combination derives Being by participation,
 Being is the prior; if both are Authentic Existents, then an
 additional Principle, a third, is imperative [a ground of
 unification]. And if this Creator, Mind, must pre-exist, why need
 Matter contain the Forming-Ideas parcel-wise for the Mind, with
 unending labour, to assort and allot? Surely the 
 undetermined could be
 brought to quality and pattern in the one comprehensive act?
 
 As for the notion that all is in all, this clearly is impossible.
 
 Those who make the base to be "the infinite" must define 
 the term.
 
 If this "infinite" means "of endless extension" there is no
 infinite among beings; there is neither an infinity-in-itself
 [Infinity Abstract] nor an infinity as an attribute to some body;
 for in the first case every part of that infinity would be infinite
 and in the second an object in which the infinity was present as an
 attribute could not be infinite apart from that attribute, could not
 be simplex, could not therefore be Matter.
 
 Atoms again cannot meet the need of a base.
 
 There are no atoms; all body is divisible endlessly: besides
 neither the continuity nor the ductility of corporeal things is
 explicable apart from Mind, or apart from the Soul which cannot be
 made up of atoms; and, again, out of atoms creation could produce
 nothing but atoms: a creative power could produce nothing from a
 material devoid of continuity. Any number of reasons might 
 be brought,
 and have been brought, against this hypothesis and it need detain us
 no longer.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. What, then, is this Kind, this Matter, described as one
 stuff, continuous and without quality?
 
 Clearly since it is without quality it is incorporeal;
 bodiliness would be quality.
 
 It must be the basic stuff of all the entities of the
 sense-world and not merely base to some while being to 
 others achieved
 form.
 
 Clay, for example, is matter to the potter but is not Matter
 pure and simple. Nothing of this sort is our object: we are seeking
 the stuff which underlies all alike. We must therefore refuse to it
 all that we find in things of sense- not merely such attributes as
 colour, heat or cold, but weight or weightlessness, thickness or
 thinness, shape and therefore magnitude; though notice that to be
 present within magnitude and shape is very different from possessing
 these qualities.
 
 It cannot be a compound, it must be a simplex, one distinct
 thing in its nature; only so can it be void of all quality. The
 Principle which gives it form gives this as something alien: so with
 magnitude and all really-existent things bestowed upon it. If, for
 example, it possessed a magnitude of its own, the Principle giving
 it form would be at the mercy of that magnitude and must produce not
 at will, but only within the limit of the Matter's capacity: to
 imagine that Will keeping step with its material is fantastic.
 
 The Matter must be of later origin than the forming-power, and
 therefore must be at its disposition throughout, ready to become
 anything, ready therefore to any bulk; besides, if it possessed
 magnitude, it would necessarily possess shape also: it would 
 be doubly
 inductile.
 
 No: all that ever appears upon it is brought in by the Idea: the
 Idea alone possesses: to it belongs the magnitude and all else that
 goes with the Reason-Principle or follows upon it. Quantity is given
 with the Ideal-Form in all the particular species- man, bird, and
 particular kind of bird.
 
 The imaging of Quantity upon Matter by an outside power is not
 more surprising than the imaging of Quality; Quality is no doubt a
 Reason-Principle, but Quantity also- being measure, number- 
 is equally
 so.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. But how can we conceive a thing having existence 
 without having
 magnitude?
 
 We have only to think of things whose identity does not depend
 on their quantity- for certainly magnitude can be distinguished from
 existence as can many other forms and attributes.
 
 In a word, every unembodied Kind must be classed as without
 quantity, and Matter is unembodied.
 
 Besides quantitativeness itself [the Absolute-Principle] does
 not possess quantity, which belongs only to things participating in
 it, a consideration which shows that Quantitativeness is an
 Idea-Principle. A white object becomes white by the presence of
 whiteness; what makes an organism white or of any other variety of
 colour is not itself a specific colour but, so to speak, a specific
 Reason-Principle: in the same way what gives an organism a certain
 bulk is not itself a thing of magnitude but is Magnitude itself, the
 abstract Absolute, or the Reason-Principle.
 
 This Magnitude-Absolute, then, enters and beats the Matter out
 into Magnitude?
 
 Not at all: the Matter was not previously shrunken small: there
 was no littleness or bigness: the Idea gives Magnitude exactly as it
 gives every quality not previously present.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. But how can I form the conception of the sizelessness of
 Matter?
 
 How do you form the concept of any absence of quality? 
 What is the
 Act of the Intellect, what is the mental approach, in such a case?
 
 The secret is Indetermination.
 
 Likeness knows its like: the indeterminate knows the
 indeterminate. Around this indefinite a definite conception will be
 realized, but the way lies through indefiniteness.
 
 All knowledge comes by Reason and the Intellectual Act; in this
 case Reason conveys information in any account it gives, but the act
 which aims at being intellectual is, here, not intellection 
 but rather
 its failure: therefore the representation of Matter must be
 spurious, unreal, something sprung of the Alien, of the unreal, and
 bound up with the alien reason.
 
 This is Plato's meaning where he says that Matter is apprehended
 by a sort of spurious reasoning.
 
 What, then, is this indetermination in the Soul? Does it 
 amount to
 an utter absence of Knowledge, as if the Soul or Mind had withdrawn?
 
 No: the indeterminate has some footing in the sphere of
 affirmation. The eye is aware of darkness as a base capable of
 receiving any colour not yet seen against it: so the Mind, putting
 aside all attributes perceptible to sense- all that corresponds to
 light- comes upon a residuum which it cannot bring under
 determination: it is thus in the state of the eye which, 
 when directed
 towards darkness, has become in some way identical with the object
 of its spurious vision.
 
 There is vision, then, in this approach of the Mind towards
 Matter?
 
 Some vision, yes; of shapelessness, of colourlessness, of the
 unlit, and therefore of the sizeless. More than this would mean that
 the Soul is already bestowing Form.
 
 But is not such a void precisely what the Soul 
 experiences when it
 has no intellection whatever?
 
 No: in that case it affirms nothing, or rather has no
 experience: but in knowing Matter, it has an experience, what may be
 described as the impact of the shapeless; for in its very
 consciousness of objects that have taken shape and size it knows
 them as compounds [i.e., as possessing with these forms a formless
 base] for they appear as things that have accepted colour and other
 quality.
 
 It knows, therefore, a whole which includes two 
 components; it has
 a clear Knowledge or perception of the overlie [the Ideas] but only
 a dim awareness of the underlie, the shapeless which is not an
 Ideal-Principle.
 
 With what is perceptible to it there is presented something
 else: what it can directly apprehend it sets on one side as its own;
 but the something else which Reason rejects, this, the dim, it knows
 dimly, this, the dark, it knows darkly, this it knows in a sort of
 non-knowing.
 
 And just as even Matter itself is not stably shapeless but, in
 things, is always shaped, the Soul also is eager to throw over it
 the thing-form; for the Soul recoils from the indefinite, dreads,
 almost, to be outside of reality, does not endure to linger about
 Non-Being.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. "But, given Magnitude and the properties we know, what else
 can be necessary to the existence of body?"
 
 Some base to be the container of all the rest.
 
 "A certain mass then; and if mass, then Magnitude? Obviously if
 your Base has no Magnitude it offers no footing to any entrant. And
 suppose it sizeless; then, what end does it serve? It never helped
 Idea or quality; now it ceases to account for differentiation or for
 magnitude, though the last, wheresoever it resides, seems to find
 its way into embodied entities by way of Matter."
 
 "Or, taking a larger view, observe that actions, productive
 operations, periods of time, movements, none of these have any such
 substratum and yet are real things; in the same way the most
 elementary body has no need of Matter; things may be, all, what they
 are, each after its own kind, in their great variety, deriving the
 coherence of their being from the blending of the various 
 Ideal-Forms.
 This Matter with its sizelessness seems, then, to be a name without
 a content."
 
 Now, to begin with: extension is not an imperative condition of
 being a recipient; it is necessary only where it happens to be a
 property inherent to the recipient's peculiar mode of being. 
 The Soul,
 for example, contains all things but holds them all in an unextended
 unity; if magnitude were one of its attributes it would 
 contain things
 in extension. Matter does actually contain in spatial extension what
 it takes in; but this is because itself is a potential recipient of
 spatial extension: animals and plants, in the same way, as they
 increase in size, take quality in parallel development with
 quantity, and they lose in the one as the other lessens.
 
 No doubt in the case of things as we know them there is a
 certain mass lying ready beforehand to the shaping power: but that
 is no reason for expecting bulk in Matter strictly so called; for in
 such cases Matter is not the absolute; it is that of some definite
 object; the Absolute Matter must take its magnitude, as every other
 property, from outside itself.
 
 A thing then need not have magnitude in order to receive form:
 it may receive mass with everything else that comes to it at the
 moment of becoming what it is to be: a phantasm of mass is enough, a
 primary aptness for extension, a magnitude of no content- whence the
 identification that has been made of Matter with The Void.
 
 But I prefer to use the word phantasm as hinting the
 indefiniteness into which the Soul spills itself when it seeks to
 communicate with Matter, finding no possibility of delimiting it,
 neither encompassing it nor able to penetrate to any fixed point of
 it, either of which achievements would be an act of delimitation.
 
 In other words, we have something which is to be described not
 as small or great but as the great-and-small: for it is at 
 once a mass
 and a thing without magnitude, in the sense that it is the Matter on
 which Mass is based and that, as it changes from great to small and
 small to great, it traverses magnitude. Its very undeterminateness
 is a mass in the same sense that of being a recipient of Magnitude-
 though of course only in the visible object.
 
 In the order of things without Mass, all that is Ideal-Principle
 possesses delimitation, each entity for itself, so that the 
 conception
 of Mass has no place in them: Matter, not delimited, having 
 in its own
 nature no stability, swept into any or every form by turns, ready to
 go here, there and everywhere, becomes a thing of 
 multiplicity: driven
 into all shapes, becoming all things, it has that much of the
 character of mass.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. It is the corporeal, then, that demands magnitude: the
 Ideal-Forms of body are Ideas installed in Mass.
 
 But these Ideas enter, not into Magnitude itself but into some
 subject that has been brought to Magnitude. For to suppose them
 entering into Magnitude and not into Matter- is to represent them as
 being either without Magnitude and without Real-Existence [and
 therefore undistinguishable from the Matter] or not Ideal-Forms [apt
 to body] but Reason-Principles [utterly removed] whose sphere could
 only be Soul; at this, there would be no such thing as body [i.e.,
 instead of Ideal-Forms shaping Matter and so producing body, there
 would be merely Reason-Principles dwelling remote in Soul.]
 
 The multiplicity here must be based upon some unity which, since
 it has been brought to Magnitude, must be, itself, distinct from
 Magnitude. Matter is the base of Identity to all that is composite:
 once each of the constituents comes bringing its own Matter with it,
 there is no need of any other base. No doubt there must be a
 container, as it were a place, to receive what is to enter, 
 but Matter
 and even body precede place and space; the primal necessity, in
 order to the existence of body, is Matter.
 
 There is no force in the suggestion that, since 
 production and act
 are immaterial, corporeal entities also must be immaterial.
 
 Bodies are compound, actions not. Further, Matter does in some
 sense underlie action; it supplies the substratum to the doer: it is
 permanently within him though it does not enter as a constituent
 into the act where, indeed, it would be a hindrance. Doubtless, one
 act does not change into another- as would be the case if 
 there were a
 specific Matter of actions- but the doer directs himself from one
 act to another so that he is the Matter, himself, to his varying
 actions.
 
 Matter, in sum, is necessary to quality and to quantity, and,
 therefore, to body.
 
 It is, thus, no name void of content; we know there is such a
 base, invisible and without bulk though it be.
 
 If we reject it, we must by the same reasoning reject qualities
 and mass: for quality, or mass, or any such entity, taken by itself
 apart, might be said not to exist. But these do exist, though in an
 obscure existence: there is much less ground for rejecting Matter,
 however it lurk, discerned by none of the senses.
 
 It eludes the eye, for it is utterly outside of colour: it is
 not heard, for it is no sound: it is no flavour or savour 
 for nostrils
 or palate: can it, perhaps, be known to touch? No: for neither is it
 corporeal; and touch deals with body, which is known by being solid,
 fragile, soft, hard, moist, dry- all properties utterly lacking in
 Matter.
 
 It is grasped only by a mental process, though that not an act
 of the intellective mind but a reasoning that finds no 
 subject; and so
 it stands revealed as the spurious thing it has been called. No
 bodiliness belongs to it; bodiliness is itself a phase of
 Reason-Principle and so is something different from Matter, 
 as Matter,
 therefore, from it: bodiliness already operative and so to speak
 made concrete would be body manifest and not Matter unelaborated.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. Are we asked to accept as the substratum some attribute or
 quality present to all the elements in common?
 
 Then, first, we must be told what precise attribute this is and,
 next, how an attribute can be a substratum.
 
 The elements are sizeless, and how conceive an attribute where
 there is neither base nor bulk?
 
 Again, if the quality possesses determination, it is not Matter
 the undetermined; and anything without determination is not a
 quality but is the substratum- the very Matter we are seeking.
 
 It may be suggested that perhaps this absence of quality means
 simply that, of its own nature, it has no participation in any of
 the set and familiar properties, but takes quality by this very
 non-participation, holding thus an absolutely individual character,
 marked off from everything else, being as it were the negation of
 those others. Deprivation, we will be told, comports quality: a
 blind man has the quality of his lack of sight. If then- it will be
 urged- Matter exhibits such a negation, surely it has a quality, all
 the more so, assuming any deprivation to be a quality, in that here
 the deprivation is all comprehensive.
 
 But this notion reduces all existence to qualified things or
 qualities: Quantity itself becomes a Quality and so does even
 Existence. Now this cannot be: if such things as Quantity and
 Existence are qualified, they are, by that very fact, not qualities:
 Quality is an addition to them; we must not commit the absurdity of
 giving the name Quality to something distinguishable from Quality,
 something therefore that is not Quality.
 
 Is it suggested that its mere Alienism is a quality in Matter?
 
 If this Alienism is difference-absolute [the abstract entity] it
 possesses no Quality: absolute Quality cannot be itself a qualified
 thing.
 
 If the Alienism is to be understood as meaning only that 
 Matter is
 differentiated, then it is different not by itself [since it is
 certainly not an absolute] but by this Difference, just as all
 identical objects are so by virtue of Identicalness [the Absolute
 principle of Identity].
 
 An absence is neither a Quality nor a qualified entity; it is
 the negation of a Quality or of something else, as noiselessness is
 the negation of noise and so on. A lack is negative; Quality demands
 something positive. The distinctive character of Matter is unshape,
 the lack of qualification and of form; surely then it is absurd to
 pretend that it has Quality in not being qualified; that is like
 saying that sizelessness constitutes a certain size.
 
 The distinctive character of Matter, then, is simply its 
 manner of
 being- not something definite inserted in it but, rather a relation
 towards other things, the relation of being distinct from them.
 
 Other things possess something besides this relation of
 Alienism: their form makes each an entity. Matter may with propriety
 be described as merely alien; perhaps, even, we might describe it as
 "The Aliens," for the singular suggests a certain definiteness while
 the plural would indicate the absence of any determination.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. But is Absence this privation itself, or something in which
 this Privation is lodged?
 
 Anyone maintaining that Matter and Privation are one and the
 same in substratum but stand separable in reason cannot be excused
 from assigning to each the precise principle which 
 distinguishes it in
 reason from the other: that which defines Matter must be kept quite
 apart from that defining the Privation and vice versa.
 
 There are three possibilities: Matter is not in Privation and
 Privation is not in Matter; or each is in each; or each is in itself
 alone.
 
 Now if they should stand quite apart, neither calling for the
 other, they are two distinct things: Matter is something other than
 Privation even though Privation always goes with it: into the
 principle of the one, the other cannot enter even potentially.
 
 If their relation to each other is that of a snubnose to 
 snubness,
 here also there is a double concept; we have two things.
 
 If they stand to each other as fire to heat- heat in fire, but
 fire not included in the concept of heat- if Matter is Privation in
 the way in which fire is heat, then the Privation is a form under
 which Matter appears but there remains a base distinct from the
 Privation and this base must be the Matter. Here, too, they are not
 one thing.
 
 Perhaps the identity in substance with differentiation in reason
 will be defended on the ground that Privation does not point to
 something present but precisely to an absence, to something 
 absent, to
 the negation or lack of Real-being: the case would be like 
 that of the
 affirmation of non-existence, where there is no real predication but
 simply a denial.
 
 Is, then, this Privation simply a non-existence?
 
 If a non-existence in the sense that it is not a thing of
 Real-being, but belongs to some other Kind of existent, we have
 still two Principles, one referring directly to the substratum, the
 other merely exhibiting the relation of the Privation to 
 other things.
 
 Or we might say that the one concept defines the relation of
 substratum to what is not substratum, while that of Privation, in
 bringing out the indeterminateness of Matter, applies to the 
 Matter in
 itself: but this still makes Privation and Matter two in 
 reason though
 one in substratum.
 
 Now if Matter possesses an identity- though only the identity of
 being indeterminate, unfixed and without quality- how can we bring
 it so under two principles?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. The further question, therefore, is raised whether
 boundlessness and indetermination are things lodging in something
 other than themselves as a sort of attribute and whether 
 Privation [or
 Negation of quality] is also an attribute residing in some separate
 substratum.
 
 Now all that is Number and Reason-Principle is outside of
 boundlessness: these bestow bound and settlement and order in
 general upon all else: neither anything that has been brought under
 order nor any Order-Absolute is needed to bring them under order.
 The thing that has to be brought under order [e.g., Matter] is other
 than the Ordering Principle which is Limit and Definiteness and
 Reason-Principle. Therefore, necessarily, the thing to be brought
 under order and to definiteness must be in itself a thing lacking
 delimitation.
 
 Now Matter is a thing that is brought under order- like all that
 shares its nature by participation or by possessing the same
 principle- therefore, necessarily, Matter is The Undelimited and not
 merely the recipient of a nonessential quality of Indefiniteness
 entering as an attribute.
 
 For, first, any attribute to any subject must be a
 Reason-Principle; and Indefiniteness is not a Reason-Principle.
 
 Secondly, what must a thing be to take Indefiniteness as an
 attribute? Obviously it must, beforehand, be either Definiteness or
 a defined thing. But Matter is neither.
 
 Then again Indefiniteness entering as an attribute into the
 definite must cease to be indefinite: but Indefiniteness has not
 entered as an attribute into Matter: that is, Matter is essentially
 Indefiniteness.
 
 The Matter even of the Intellectual Realm is the Indefinite,
 [the undelimited]; it must be a thing generated by the undefined
 nature, the illimitable nature, of the Eternal Being, The One
 illimitableness, however, not possessing native existence There but
 engendered by The One.
 
 But how can Matter be common to both spheres, be here and be
 There?
 
 Because even Indefiniteness has two phases.
 
 But what difference can there be between phase and phase of
 Indefiniteness?
 
 The difference of archetype and image.
 
 So that Matter here [as only an image of Indefiniteness] would
 be less indefinite?
 
 On the contrary, more indefinite as an Image-thing remote from
 true being. Indefiniteness is the greater in the less ordered
 object; the less deep in good, the deeper in evil. The Indeterminate
 in the Intellectual Realm, where there is truer being, might 
 almost be
 called merely an Image of Indefiniteness: in this lower Sphere where
 there is less Being, where there is a refusal of the 
 Authentic, and an
 adoption of the Image-Kind, Indefiniteness is more authentically
 indefinite.
 
 But this argument seems to make no difference between the
 indefinite object and Indefiniteness-essential. Is there none?
 
 In any object in which Reason and Matter co-exist we distinguish
 between Indeterminateness and the Indeterminate subject: but where
 Matter stands alone we make them identical, or, better, we would say
 right out that in that case essential Indeterminateness is not
 present; for it is a Reason-Principle and could not lodge in the
 indeterminate object without at once annulling the indeterminateness.
 
 Matter, then, must be described as Indefinite of itself, by its
 natural opposition to Reason-Principle. Reason is Reason and nothing
 else; just so Matter, opposed by its indeterminateness to Reason, is
 Indeterminateness and nothing else.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. Then Matter is simply Alienism [the Principle of Difference]?
 
 No: it is merely that part of Alienism which stands in
 contradiction with the Authentic Existents which are
 Reason-Principles. So understood, this non-existent has a certain
 measure of existence; for it is identical with Privation, which also
 is a thing standing in opposition to the things that exist in Reason.
 
 But must not Privation cease to have existence, when 
 what has been
 lacking is present at last?
 
 By no means: the recipient of a state or character is not a
 state but the Privation of the state; and that into which
 determination enters is neither a determined object nor
 determination itself, but simply the wholly or partly undetermined.
 
 Still, must not the nature of this Undetermined be 
 annulled by the
 entry of Determination, especially where this is no mere attribute?
 
 No doubt to introduce quantitative determination into an
 undetermined object would annul the original state; but in the
 particular case, the introduction of determination only confirms the
 original state, bringing it into actuality, into full effect, as
 sowing brings out the natural quality of land or as a female
 organism impregnated by the male is not defeminized but becomes more
 decidedly of its sex; the thing becomes more emphatically itself.
 
 But on this reasoning must not Matter owe its evil to having in
 some degree participated in good?
 
 No: its evil is in its first lack: it was not a 
 possessor (of some
 specific character).
 
 To lack one thing and to possess another, in something like
 equal proportions, is to hold a middle state of good and evil: but
 whatsoever possesses nothing and so is in destitution- and
 especially what is essentially destitution- must be evil in its own
 Kind.
 
 For in Matter we have no mere absence of means or of strength;
 it is utter destitution- of sense, of virtue, of beauty, of pattern,
 of Ideal principle, of quality. This is surely ugliness, utter
 disgracefulness, unredeemed evil.
 
 The Matter in the Intellectual Realm is an Existent, for there
 is nothing previous to it except the Beyond-Existence; but what
 precedes the Matter of this sphere is Existence; by its alienism in
 regard to the beauty and good of Existence, Matter is therefore a
 non-existent.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIFTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON POTENTIALITY AND ACTUALITY.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. A distinction is made between things existing actually and
 things existing potentially; a certain Actuality, also, is spoken of
 as a really existent entity. We must consider what content 
 there is in
 these terms.
 
 Can we distinguish between Actuality [an absolute, abstract
 Principle] and the state of being-in-act? And if there is such an
 Actuality, is this itself in Act, or are the two quite distinct so
 that this actually existent thing need not be, itself, an Act?
 
 It is indubitable that Potentiality exists in the Realm of
 Sense: but does the Intellectual Realm similarly include the 
 potential
 or only the actual? and if the potential exists there, does it
 remain merely potential for ever? And, if so, is this resistance to
 actualization due to its being precluded [as a member of the 
 Divine or
 Intellectual world] from time-processes?
 
 First we must make clear what potentiality is.
 
 We cannot think of potentiality as standing by itself; there can
 be no potentiality apart from something which a given thing may be
 or become. Thus bronze is the potentiality of a statue: but 
 if nothing
 could be made out of the bronze, nothing wrought upon it, if it
 could never be anything as a future to what it has been, if it
 rejected all change, it would be bronze and nothing else: its own
 character it holds already as a present thing, and that would be the
 full of its capacity: it would be destitute of potentiality.
 Whatsoever has a potentiality must first have a character of its
 own; and its potentiality will consist in its having a reach beyond
 that character to some other.
 
 Sometimes after it has turned its potentiality into actuality it
 will remain what it was; sometimes it will sink itself to the
 fullest extent in the new form and itself disappear: these two
 different modes are exemplified in (1) bronze as potentially a
 statue and (2) water [= primal-liquid] as potentially bronze or,
 again, air as potentially fire.
 
 But if this be the significance of potentiality, may we describe
 it as a Power towards the thing that is to be? Is the Bronze a power
 towards a statue?
 
 Not in the sense of an effectively productive force: such a
 power could not be called a potentiality. Of course Potentiality may
 be a power, as, for instance, when we are referring not merely to a
 thing which may be brought into actualization but to Actuality
 itself [the Principle or Abstract in which potentiality and the
 power of realizing potentiality may be thought of as identical]: but
 it is better, as more conducive to clarity, to use "Potentiality" in
 regard to the process of Actualization and "Power" in regard to the
 Principle, Actuality.
 
 Potentiality may be thought of as a Substratum to states and
 shapes- and forms which are to be received, which it welcomes by its
 nature and even strives for- sometimes in gain but 
 sometimes, also, to
 loss, to the annulling of some distinctive manner of Being already
 actually achieved.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Then the question rises whether Matter- potentially what it
 becomes by receiving shape- is actually something else or whether it
 has no actuality at all. In general terms: When a potentiality has
 taken a definite form, does it retain its being? Is the
 potentiality, itself, in actualization? The alternative is that,
 when we speak of the "Actual Statue" and of the "Potential Statue,"
 the Actuality is not predicated of the same subject as the
 "Potentiality." If we have really two different subjects, then the
 potential does not really become the actual: all that happens is
 that an actual entity takes the place of a potential.
 
 The actualized entity is not the Matter [the 
 Potentiality, merely]
 but a combination, including the Form-Idea upon the Matter.
 
 This is certainly the case when a quite different thing results
 from the actualization-statue, for example, the combination, is
 distinctly different from the bronze, the base; where the 
 resultant is
 something quite new, the Potentiality has clearly not, itself,
 become what is now actualized. But take the case where a 
 person with a
 capacity for education becomes in fact educated: is not
 potentiality, here, identical with actualization? Is not the
 potentially wise Socrates the same man as the Socrates actually wise?
 
 But is an ignorant man a being of knowledge because he is so
 potentially? Is he, in virtue of his non-essential ignorance,
 potentially an instructed being?
 
 It is not because of his accidental ignorance that he is a being
 of Knowledge: it is because, ignorant though he be by accident, his
 mind, apt to knowledge, is the potentiality through which he may
 become so. Thus, in the case of the potentially instructed who have
 become so in fact, the potentiality is taken up into the actual; or,
 if we prefer to put it so, there is on the one side the potentiality
 while, on the other, there is the power in actual possession of the
 form.
 
 If, then, the Potentiality is the Substratum while the thing in
 actualization- the Statue for example a combination, how are we to
 describe the form that has entered the bronze?
 
 There will be nothing unsound in describing this shape, this
 Form which has brought the entity from potentiality to actuality, as
 the actualization; but of course as the actualization of the
 definite particular entity, not as Actuality the abstract: 
 we must not
 confuse it with the other actualization, strictly so called, that
 which is contrasted with the power producing actualization. The
 potential is led out into realization by something other than
 itself; power accomplishes, of itself, what is within its scope, but
 by virtue of Actuality [the abstract]: the relation is that existing
 between a temperament and its expression in act, between courage and
 courageous conduct. So far so good:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. We come now to the purpose of all this discussion; to make
 clear in what sense or to what degree Actualization is predicable in
 the Intellectual Realm and whether all is in Actualization 
 there, each
 and every member of that realm being an Act, or whether Potentiality
 also has place there.
 
 Now: if there is no Matter there to harbour potentiality: if
 nothing there has any future apart from its actual mode: if nothing
 there generates, whether by changes or in the permanence of its
 identity; if nothing goes outside of itself to give being to what is
 other than itself; then, potentiality has no place there: the Beings
 there possess actuality as belonging to eternity, not to time.
 
 Those, however, who assert Matter in the Intellectual Realm will
 be asked whether the existence of that Matter does not imply the
 potential there too; for even if Matter there exists in another mode
 than here, every Being there will have its Matter, its form and the
 union of the two [and therefore the potential, separable from the
 actual]. What answer is to be made?
 
 Simply, that even the Matter there is Idea, just as the Soul, an
 Idea, is Matter to another [a higher] Being.
 
 But relatively to that higher, the Soul is a potentiality?
 
 No: for the Idea [to which it is Matter] is integral to the Soul
 and does not look to a future; the distinction between the Soul and
 its Idea is purely mental: the Idea and the Matter it includes are
 conceived as a conjunction but are essentially one Kind: 
 remember that
 Aristotle makes his Fifth Body immaterial.
 
 But surely Potentiality exists in the Soul? Surely the Soul is
 potentially the living-being of this world before it has 
 become so? Is
 it not potentially musical, and everything else that it has not been
 and becomes? Does not this imply potentiality even in the 
 Intellectual
 Existences?
 
 No: the Soul is not potentially these things; it is a Power
 towards them.
 
 But after what mode does Actualization exist in the Intellectual
 Realm?
 
 Is it the Actualization of a statue, where the combination is
 realized because the Form-Idea has mastered each separate
 constituent of the total?
 
 No: it is that every constituent there is a Form-Idea and, thus,
 is perfect in its Being.
 
 There is in the Intellectual Principle no progression from some
 power capable of intellection to the Actuality of 
 intellection: such a
 progression would send us in search of a Prior Principle not
 progressing from Power to Act; there all stands ever realized.
 Potentiality requires an intervention from outside itself to bring
 it to the actualization which otherwise cannot be; but what 
 possesses,
 of itself, identity unchangeable for ever is an 
 actualization: all the
 Firsts then are actualizations, simply because eternally and of
 themselves they possess all that is necessary to their completion.
 
 This applies equally to the Soul, not to that in Matter but to
 that in the Intellectual Sphere; and even that in Matter, the Soul
 of Growth, is an actualization in its difference; it possesses
 actually [and not, like material things, merely in image] the Being
 that belongs to it.
 
 Then, everything, in the intellectual is in actualization and so
 all There is Actuality?
 
 Why not? If that Nature is rightly said to be "Sleepless," and
 to be Life and the noblest mode of Life, the noblest Activities must
 be there; all then is actualization there, everything is an 
 Actuality,
 for everything is a Life, and all Place there is the Place 
 of Life, in
 the true sense the ground and spring of Soul and of the Intellectual
 Principle.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. Now, in general anything that has a potentiality is actually
 something else, and this potentiality of the future mode of being is
 an existing mode.
 
 But what we think of as Matter, what we assert to be the
 potentiality of all things, cannot be said to be actually any one
 being among beings: if it were of itself any definite being, it
 could not be potentially all.
 
 If, then, it is not among existences, it must necessarily be
 without existence.
 
 How, therefore, can it be actually anything?
 
 The answer is that while Matter can not be any of the 
 things which
 are founded upon it, it may quite well be something else, admitting
 that all existences are not rooted in Matter.
 
 But once more, if it is excluded from the entities 
 founded upon it
 and all these are Beings, it must itself be a Non-Being.
 
 It is, further, by definition, formless and therefore 
 not an Idea:
 it cannot then be classed among things of the Intellectual Realm,
 and so is, once more, a Non-Being. Falling, as regards both worlds,
 under Non-Being, it is all the more decidedly the Non-Being.
 
 It has eluded the Nature of the Authentic Existences; it has
 even failed to come up with the things to which a spurious existence
 can be attributed- for it is not even a phantasm of Reason as these
 are- how is it possible to include it under any mode of Being?
 
 And if it falls under no mode of Being, what can it actually be?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. How can we talk of it? How can it be the Matter of 
 real things?
 
 It is talked of, and it serves, precisely, as a Potentiality.
 
 And, as being a Potentiality, it is not of the order of the
 thing it is to become: its existence is no more than an announcement
 of a future, as it were a thrust forward to what is to come into
 existence.
 
 As Potentiality then, it is not any definite thing but the
 potentiality of everything: being nothing in itself- beyond 
 what being
 Matter amounts to- it is not in actualization. For if it 
 were actually
 something, that actualized something would not be Matter, or at
 least not Matter out and out, but merely Matter in the limited sense
 in which bronze is the matter of the statue.
 
 And its Non-Being must be no mere difference from Being.
 
 Motion, for example, is different from Being, but plays about
 it, springing from it and living within it: Matter is, so to speak,
 the outcast of Being, it is utterly removed, irredeemably what it
 was from the beginning: in origin it was Non-Being and so it remains.
 
 Nor are we to imagine that, standing away at the very beginning
 from the universal circle of Beings, it was thus necessarily 
 an active
 Something or that it became a Something. It has never been able to
 annex for itself even a visible outline from all the forms 
 under which
 it has sought to creep: it has always pursued something other than
 itself; it was never more than a Potentiality towards its next:
 where all the circle of Being ends, there only is it manifest;
 discerned underneath things produced after it, it is remoter [from
 Real-Being] even than they.
 
 Grasped, then, as an underlie in each order of Being, it 
 can be no
 actualization of either: all that is allowed to it is to be a
 Potentiality, a weak and blurred phantasm, a thing incapable of a
 Shape of its own.
 
 Its actuality is that of being a phantasm, the actuality of
 being a falsity; and the false in actualization is the veritably
 false, which again is Authentic Non-Existence.
 
 So that Matter, as the Actualization of Non-Being, is 
 all the more
 decidedly Non-Being, is Authentic Non-Existence.
 
 Thus, since the very reality of its Nature is situated in
 Non-Being, it is in no degree the Actualization of any 
 definite Being.
 
 If it is to be present at all, it cannot be an Actualization,
 for then it would not be the stray from Authentic Being which it is,
 the thing having its Being in Non-Beingness: for, note, in 
 the case of
 things whose Being is a falsity, to take away the falsity is to take
 away what Being they have, and if we introduce actualization into
 things whose Being and Essence is Potentiality, we destroy the
 foundation of their nature since their Being is Potentiality.
 
 If Matter is to be kept as the unchanging substratum, we 
 must keep
 it as Matter: that means- does it not?- that we must define it as a
 Potentiality and nothing more- or refute these considerations.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SIXTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 QUALITY AND FORM-IDEA.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Are not Being and Reality (to on and he ousia) distinct;
 must we not envisage Being as the substance stripped of all else,
 while Reality is this same thing, Being, accompanied by the others-
 Movement, Rest, Identity, Difference- so that these are the specific
 constituents of Reality?
 
 The universal fabric, then, is Reality in which Being, Movement,
 and so on are separate constituents.
 
 Now Movement has Being as an accident and therefore should have
 Reality as an accident; or is it something serving to the completion
 of Reality?
 
 No: Movement is a Reality; everything in the Supreme is 
 a Reality.
 
 Why, then, does not Reality reside, equally, in this sphere?
 
 In the Supreme there is Reality because all things are one; ours
 is the sphere of images whose separation produces grades of
 difference. Thus in the spermatic unity all the human members are
 present undistinguishably; there is no separation of head and hand:
 their distinct existence begins in the life here, whose content is
 image, not Authentic Existence.
 
 And are the distinct Qualities in the Authentic Realm to be
 explained in the same way? Are they differing Realities 
 centred in one
 Reality or gathered round Being- differences which constitute
 Realities distinct from each other within the common fact of Reality?
 
 This is sound enough; but it does not apply to all the qualities
 of this sphere, some of which, no doubt, are differentiations of
 Reality- such as the quality of two-footedness or 
 four-footedness- but
 others are not such differentiations of Reality and, because they
 are not so, must be called qualities and nothing more.
 
 On the other hand, one and the same thing may be sometimes a
 differentiation of Reality and sometimes not- a differentiation when
 it is a constitutive element, and no differentiation in some other
 thing, where it is not a constitutive element but an accidental. The
 distinction may be seen in the [constitutive] whiteness of a swan or
 of ceruse and the whiteness which in a man is an accidental.
 
 Where whiteness belongs to the very Reason-Form of the 
 thing it is
 a constitutive element and not a quality; where it is a superficial
 appearance it is a quality.
 
 In other words, qualification may be distinguished. We may think
 of a qualification that is of the very substance of the thing,
 something exclusively belonging to it. And there is a qualifying
 that is nothing more, [not constituting but simply] giving some
 particular character to the real thing; in this second case the
 qualification does not produce any alteration towards Reality or
 away from it; the Reality has existed fully constituted before the
 incoming of the qualification which- whether in soul or body- merely
 introduces some state from outside, and by this addition elaborates
 the Reality into the particular thing.
 
 But what if [the superficial appearance such as] the visible
 whiteness in ceruse is constitutive? In the swan the whiteness is not
 constitutive since a swan need not be white: it is constitutive in
 ceruse, just as warmth is constitutive of the Reality, fire.
 
 No doubt we may be told that the Reality in fire is [not warmth
 but] fieriness and in ceruse an analogous abstraction: yet the fact
 remains that in visible fire warmth or fieriness is constitutive and
 in the ceruse whiteness.
 
 Thus the same entities are represented at once as being not
 qualities but constituents of Reality and not constituents but
 qualities.
 
 Now it is absurd to talk as if one identical thing 
 changed its own
 nature according to whether it is present as a constituent or as an
 accidental.
 
 The truth is that while the Reason-Principles producing these
 entities contain nothing but what is of the nature of Reality, yet
 only in the Intellectual Realm do the produced things possess real
 existence: here they are not real; they are qualified.
 
 And this is the starting-point of an error we constantly make:
 in our enquiries into things we let realities escape us and fasten
 on what is mere quality. Thus fire is not the thing we so name from
 the observation of certain qualities present; fire is a 
 Reality [not a
 combination of material phenomena]; the phenomena observed here and
 leading us to name fire call us away from the authentic thing; a
 quality is erected into the very matter of definition- a procedure,
 however, reasonable enough in regard to things of the realm of sense
 which are in no case realities but accidents of Reality.
 
 And this raises the question how Reality can ever spring 
 from what
 are not Realities.
 
 It has been shown that a thing coming into being cannot be
 identical with its origins: it must here be added that nothing thus
 coming into being [no "thing of process"] can be a Reality.
 
 Then how do we assert the rising in the Supreme of what we have
 called Reality from what is not Reality [i.e., from the pure Being
 which is above Reality]?
 
 The Reality there- possessing Authentic Being in the strictest
 sense, with the least admixture- is Reality by existing among the
 differentiations of the Authentic Being; or, better, Reality is
 affirmed in the sense that with the existence of the Supreme is
 included its Act so that Reality seems to be a perfectionment of the
 Authentic Being, though in the truth it is a diminution; the
 produced thing is deficient by the very addition, by being less
 simplex, by standing one step away from the Authentic.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. But we must enquire into Quality in itself: to know its
 nature is certainly the way to settle our general question.
 
 The first point is to assure ourselves whether or not one and
 the same thing may be held to be sometimes a mere qualification and
 sometimes a constituent of Reality- not staying on the point that
 qualification could not be constitutive of a Reality but of a
 qualified Reality only.
 
 Now in a Reality possessing a determined quality, the Reality
 and the fact of existence precede the qualified Reality.
 
 What, then, in the case of fire is the Reality which precedes
 the qualified Reality?
 
 Its mere body, perhaps? If so, body being the Reality, fire is a
 warmed body; and the total thing is not the Reality; and the fire
 has warmth as a man might have a snub nose.
 
 Rejecting its warmth, its glow, its lightness- all which 
 certainly
 do seem to be qualities- and its resistance, there is left only its
 extension by three dimensions: in other words, its Matter is its
 Reality.
 
 But that cannot be held: surely the form is much more likely
 than the Matter to be the Reality.
 
 But is not the Form of Quality?
 
 No, the Form is not a Quality: it is a Reason-Principle.
 
 And the outcome of this Reason-Principle entering into the
 underlying Matter, what is that?
 
 Certainly not what is seen and burns, for that is the 
 something in
 which these qualities inhere.
 
 We might define the burning as an Act springing from the
 Reason-Principle: then the warming and lighting and other effects of
 fire will be its Acts and we still have found no foothold for its
 quality.
 
 Such completions of a Reality cannot be called qualities since
 they are its Acts emanating from the Reason-Principles and from the
 essential powers. A quality is something persistently 
 outside Reality;
 it cannot appear as Reality in one place after having figured in
 another as quality; its function is to bring in the something more
 after the Reality is established, such additions as virtue, vice,
 ugliness, beauty, health, a certain shape. On this last, however, it
 may be remarked that triangularity and quadrangularity are not in
 themselves qualities, but there is quality when a thing is
 triangular by having been brought to that shape; the quality is not
 the triangularity but the patterning to it. The case is the same
 with the arts and avocations.
 
 Thus: Quality is a condition superadded to a Reality whose
 existence does not depend upon it, whether this something more be a
 later acquirement or an accompaniment from the first; it is
 something in whose absence the Reality would still be complete. It
 will sometimes come and go, sometimes be inextricably attached, so
 that there are two forms of Quality, the moveable and the fixed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. The Whiteness, therefore, in a human being is, clearly, to be
 classed not as a quality but as an activity- the act of a power
 which can make white; and similarly what we think of as qualities in
 the Intellectual Realm should be known as activities; they are
 activities which to our minds take the appearance of quality from
 the fact that, differing in character among themselves, each of them
 is a particularity which, so to speak, distinguishes those Realities
 from each other.
 
 What, then, distinguishes Quality in the Intellectual Realm from
 that here, if both are Acts?
 
 The difference is that these ["Quality-Activities"] in 
 the Supreme
 do not indicate the very nature of the Reality [as do the
 corresponding Activities here] nor do they indicate variations of
 substance or of [essential] character; they merely indicate what we
 think of as Quality but in the Intellectual Realm must still be
 Activity.
 
 In other words this thing, considered in its aspect as
 possessing the characteristic property of Reality is by that alone
 recognised as no mere Quality. But when our reason separates what is
 distinctive in these ["Quality-Activities"]- not in the sense of
 abolishing them but rather as taking them to itself and making
 something new of them- this new something is Quality: reason has, so
 to speak, appropriated a portion of Reality, that portion manifest
 to it on the surface.
 
 By this analogy, warmth, as a concomitant of the specific nature
 of fire, may very well be no quality in fire but an Idea-Form
 belonging to it, one of its activities, while being merely a Quality
 in other things than fire: as it is manifested in any warm object,
 it is not a mode of Reality but merely a trace, a shadow, an image,
 something that has gone forth from its own Reality- where it was an
 Act- and in the warm object is a quality.
 
 All, then, that is accident and not Act; all but what is 
 Idea-form
 of the Reality; all that merely confers pattern; all this is
 Quality: qualities are characteristics and modes other than those
 constituting the substratum of a thing.
 
 But the Archetypes of all such qualities, the foundation in
 which they exist primarily, these are Activities of the Intellectual
 Beings.
 
 And; one and the same thing cannot be both Quality and
 non-quality: the thing void of Real-Existence is Quality; but the
 thing accompanying Reality is either Form or Activity: there is no
 longer self-identity when, from having its being in itself, anything
 comes to be in something else with a fall from its standing as Form
 and Activity.
 
 Finally, anything which is never Form but always accidental to
 something else is Quality unmixed and nothing more.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SEVENTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON COMPLETE TRANSFUSION.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Some enquiry must be made into what is known as the complete
 transfusion of material substances.
 
 Is it possible that fluid be blended with fluid in such 
 a way that
 each penetrate the other through and through? or- a difference of no
 importance if any such penetration occurs- that one of them pass
 completely through the other?
 
 Those that admit only contact need not detain us. They 
 are dealing
 with mixture, not with the coalescence which makes the total a thing
 of like parts, each minutest particle being composed of all the
 combined elements.
 
 But there are those who, admitting coalescence, confine it to
 the qualities: to them the material substances of two bodies are in
 contact merely, but in this contact of the matter they find footing
 for the qualities of each.
 
 Their view is plausible because it rejects the notion of total
 admixture and because it recognizes that the masses of the mixing
 bodies must be whittled away if there is to be mixture without any
 gap, if, that is to say, each substance must be divided within
 itself through and through for complete interpenetration with the
 other. Their theory is confirmed by the cases in which two mixed
 substances occupy a greater space than either singly, especially a
 space equal to the conjoined extent of each: for, as they point out,
 in an absolute interpenetration the infusion of the one into 
 the other
 would leave the occupied space exactly what it was before and, where
 the space occupied is not increased by the juxtaposition, 
 they explain
 that some expulsion of air has made room for the incoming substance.
 They ask further, how a minor quantity of one substance can be
 spread out so as to interpenetrate a major quantity of another. In
 fact they have a multitude of arguments.
 
 Those, on the other hand, that accept "complete transfusion,"
 might object that it does not require the reduction of the mixed
 things to fragments, a certain cleavage being sufficient: thus, for
 instance, sweat does not split up the body or even pierce 
 holes in it.
 And if it is answered that this may well be a special decree 
 of Nature
 to allow of the sweat exuding, there is the case of those 
 manufactured
 articles, slender but without puncture, in which we can see a liquid
 wetting them through and through so that it runs down from the upper
 to the under surface. How can this fact be explained, since both the
 liquid and the solid are bodily substances? Interpenetration without
 disintegration is difficult to conceive, and if there is such mutual
 disintegration the two must obviously destroy each other.
 
 When they urge that often there is a mixing without augmentation
 their adversaries can counter at once with the exit of air.
 
 When there is an increase in the space occupied, nothing refutes
 the explanation- however unsatisfying- that this is a necessary
 consequence of two bodies bringing to a common stock their magnitude
 equally with their other attributes: size is as permanent as 
 any other
 property; and, exactly as from the blending of qualities 
 there results
 a new form of thing, the combination of the two, so we find a new
 magnitude; the blending gives us a magnitude representing each of
 the two. But at this point the others will answer, "If you mean that
 substance lies side by side with substance and mass with mass, each
 carrying its quantum of magnitude, you are at one with us: if there
 were complete transfusion, one substance sinking its original
 magnitude in the other, we would have no longer the case of two
 lines joined end to end by their terminal points and thus 
 producing an
 increased extension; we would have line superimposed upon line with,
 therefore, no increase."
 
 But a lesser quantity permeates the entire extent of a 
 larger; the
 smallest is sunk in the greatest; transfusion is exhibited
 unmistakably. In certain cases it is possible to pretend 
 that there is
 no total penetration but there are manifest examples leaving no room
 for the pretence. In what they say of the spreading out of 
 masses they
 cannot be thought very plausible; the extension would have to be
 considerable indeed in the case of a very small quantity [to be in
 true mixture with a very large mass]; for they do not 
 suggest any such
 extension by change as that of water into air.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. This, however, raises a problem deserving investigation in
 itself: what has happened when a definite magnitude of water becomes
 air, and how do we explain the increase of volume? But for 
 the present
 we must be content with the matter thus far discussed out of all the
 varied controversy accumulated on either side.
 
 It remains for us to make out on our own account the true
 explanation of the phenomenon of mixing, without regard to the
 agreement or disagreement of that theory with any of the current
 opinions mentioned.
 
 When water runs through wool or when papyrus-pulp gives up its
 moisture why is not the moist content expressed to the very last
 drop or even, without question of outflow, how can we possibly think
 that in a mixture the relation of matter with matter, mass with
 mass, is contact and that only the qualities are fused? The pulp is
 not merely in touch with water outside it or even in its pores; it
 is wet through and through so that every particle of its matter is
 drenched in that quality. Now if the matter is soaked all 
 through with
 the quality, then the water is everywhere in the pulp.
 
 "Not the water; the quality of the water."
 
 But then, where is the water? and [if only a quality has
 entered] why is there a change of volume? The pulp has been expanded
 by the addition: that is to say it has received magnitude from the
 incoming substance but if it has received the magnitude, 
 magnitude has
 been added; and a magnitude added has not been absorbed; 
 therefore the
 combined matter must occupy two several places. And as the two
 mixing substances communicate quality and receive matter in mutual
 give and take so they may give and take magnitude. Indeed when a
 quality meets another quality it suffers some change; it is 
 mixed, and
 by that admixture it is no longer pure and therefore no longer
 itself but a blunter thing, whereas magnitude joining magnitude
 retains its full strength.
 
 But let it be understood how we came to say that body passing
 through and through another body must produce 
 disintegration, while we
 make qualities pervade their substances without producing
 disintegration: the bodilessness of qualities is the reason. Matter,
 too, is bodiless: it may, then, be supposed that as Matter pervades
 everything so the bodiless qualities associated with it- as long as
 they are few- have the power of penetration without disintegration.
 Anything solid would be stopped either in virtue of the fact that a
 solid has the precise quality which forbids it to penetrate 
 or in that
 the mere coexistence of too many qualities in Matter [constitutes
 density and so] produces the same inhibition.
 
 If, then, what we call a dense body is so by reason of the
 presence of many qualities, that plenitude of qualities will be the
 cause [of the inhibition].
 
 If on the other hand density is itself a quality like what they
 call corporeity, then the cause will be that particular quality.
 
 This would mean that the qualities of two substances do not
 bring about the mixing by merely being qualities but by being apt to
 mixture; nor does Matter refuse to enter into a mixing as Matter but
 as being associated with a quality repugnant to mixture; and this
 all the more since it has no magnitude of its own but only does not
 reject magnitude.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. We have thus covered our main ground, but since corporeity has
 been mentioned, we must consider its nature: is it the conjunction
 of all the qualities or is it an Idea, or Reason-Principle, whose
 presence in Matter constitutes a body?
 
 Now if body is the compound, the thing made up of all 
 the required
 qualities plus Matter, then corporeity is nothing more than their
 conjunction.
 
 And if it is a Reason-Principle, one whose incoming constitutes
 the body, then clearly this Principle contains embraced within
 itself all the qualities. If this Reason-Principle is to be no mere
 principle of definition exhibiting the nature of a thing but a
 veritable Reason constituting the thing, then it cannot 
 itself contain
 Matter but must encircle Matter, and by being present to Matter
 elaborate the body: thus the body will be Matter associated with an
 indwelling Reason-Principle which will be in itself immaterial, pure
 Idea, even though irremoveably attached to the body. It is not to be
 confounded with that other Principle in man- treated elsewhere-
 which dwells in the Intellectual World by right of being itself an
 Intellectual Principle.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 EIGHTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 WHY DISTANT OBJECTS APPEAR SMALL.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Seen from a distance, objects appear reduced and close
 together, however far apart they be: within easy range, their sizes
 and the distances that separate them are observed correctly.
 
 Distant objects show in this reduction because they must be
 drawn together for vision and the light must be concentrated to suit
 the size of the pupil; besides, as we are placed farther and farther
 away from the material mass under observation, it is more 
 and more the
 bare form that reaches us, stripped, so to speak, of magnitude as of
 all other quality.
 
 Or it may be that we appreciate the magnitude of an object by
 observing the salience and recession of its several parts, so that
 to perceive its true size we must have it close at hand.
 
 Or again, it may be that magnitude is known incidentally [as a
 deduction] from the observation of colour. With an object at hand we
 know how much space is covered by the colour; at a distance, 
 only that
 something is coloured, for the parts, quantitatively distinct among
 themselves, do not give us the precise knowledge of that 
 quantity, the
 colours themselves reaching us only in a blurred impression.
 
 What wonder, then, if size be like sound- reduced when the form
 reaches us but faintly- for in sound the hearing is concerned only
 about the form; magnitude is not discerned except incidentally.
 
 Well, in hearing magnitude is known incidentally; but how? Touch
 conveys a direct impression of a visible object; what gives us the
 same direct impression of an object of hearing?
 
 The magnitude of a sound is known not by actual quantity but by
 degree of impact, by intensity- and this in no indirect 
 knowledge; the
 ear appreciates a certain degree of force, exactly as the palate
 perceives by no indirect knowledge, a certain degree of 
 sweetness. But
 the true magnitude of a sound is its extension; this the hearing may
 define to itself incidentally by deduction from the degree of
 intensity but not to the point of precision. The intensity is merely
 the definite effect at a particular spot; the magnitude is a 
 matter of
 totality, the sum of space occupied.
 
 Still the colours seen from a distance are faint; but 
 they are not
 small as the masses are.
 
 True; but there is the common fact of diminution. There is
 colour with its diminution, faintness; there is magnitude with its
 diminution, smallness; and magnitude follows colour diminishing
 stage by stage with it.
 
 But, the phenomenon is more easily explained by the example of
 things of wide variety. Take mountains dotted with houses, woods and
 other land-marks; the observation of each detail gives us 
 the means of
 calculating, by the single objects noted, the total extent covered:
 but, where no such detail of form reaches us, our vision, which
 deals with detail, has not the means towards the knowledge of the
 whole by measurement of any one clearly discerned magnitude. This
 applies even to objects of vision close at hand: where there is
 variety and the eye sweeps over all at one glance so that the forms
 are not all caught, the total appears the less in proportion to the
 detail which has escaped the eye; observe each single point and then
 you can estimate the volume precisely. Again, magnitudes of 
 one colour
 and unbroken form trick the sense of quantity: the vision can no
 longer estimate by the particular; it slips away, not finding the
 stand-by of the difference between part and part.
 
 It was the detail that prevented a near object deceiving 
 our sense
 of magnitude: in the case of the distant object, because the eye
 does not pass stage by stage through the stretch of intervening
 space so as to note its forms, therefore it cannot report the
 magnitude of that space.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. The explanation by lesser angle of vision has been elsewhere
 dismissed; one point, however, we may urge here.
 
 Those attributing the reduced appearance to the lesser angle
 occupied allow by their very theory that the unoccupied 
 portion of the
 eye still sees something beyond or something quite apart from the
 object of vision, if only air-space.
 
 Now consider some very large object of vision, that mountain for
 example. No part of the eye is unoccupied; the mountain adequately
 fills it so that it can take in nothing beyond, for the mountain as
 seen either corresponds exactly to the eye-space or 
 stretches away out
 of range to right and to left. How does the explanation by lesser
 angle of vision hold good in this case, where the object 
 still appears
 smaller, far, than it is and yet occupies the eye entire?
 
 Or look up to the sky and no hesitation can remain. Of course we
 cannot take in the entire hemisphere at one glance; the eye directed
 to it could not cover so vast an expanse. But suppose the 
 possibility:
 the entire eye, then, embraces the hemisphere entire; but the
 expanse of the heavens is far greater than it appears; how can its
 appearing far less than it is be explained by a lessening of 
 the angle
 of vision?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 NINTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 AGAINST THOSE THAT AFFIRM THE CREATOR OF THE KOSMOS AND
 
 THE KOSMOS ITSELF TO BE EVIL: [GENERALLY QUOTED
 
 AS "AGAINST THE GNOSTICS"].
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. We have seen elsewhere that the Good, the Principle, is
 simplex, and, correspondingly, primal- for the secondary can never
 be simplex- that it contains nothing: that it is an integral Unity.
 
 Now the same Nature belongs to the Principle we know as The One.
 just as the goodness of The Good is essential and not the 
 outgrowth of
 some prior substance so the Unity of The One is its essential.
 
 Therefore:
 
 When we speak of The One and when we speak of The Good we must
 recognize an Identical Nature; we must affirm that they are the
 same- not, it is true, as venturing any predication with regard to
 that [unknowable] Hypostasis but simply as indicating it to ourselves
 in the best terms we find.
 
 Even in calling it "The First" we mean no more than to express
 that it is the most absolutely simplex: it is the Self-Sufficing
 only in the sense that it is not of that compound nature which would
 make it dependent upon any constituent; it is "the Self-Contained"
 because everything contained in something alien must also exist by
 that alien.
 
 Deriving, then, from nothing alien, entering into nothing alien,
 in no way a made-up thing, there can be nothing above it.
 
 We need not, then, go seeking any other Principles; this- the
 One and the Good- is our First; next to it follows the Intellectual
 Principle, the Primal Thinker; and upon this follows Soul. 
 Such is the
 order in nature. The Intellectual Realm allows no more than these
 and no fewer.
 
 Those who hold to fewer Principles must hold the identity of
 either Intellectual-Principle and Soul or of Intellectual-Principle
 and The First; but we have abundantly shown that these are distinct.
 
 It remains for us to consider whether there are more than these
 Three.
 
 Now what other [Divine] Kinds could there be? No 
 Principles of the
 universe could be found at once simpler and more transcendent than
 this whose existence we have affirmed and described.
 
 They will scarcely urge upon us the doubling of the Principle in
 Act by a Principle in Potentiality. It is absurd to seek such a
 plurality by distinguishing between potentiality and actuality in
 the case of immaterial beings whose existence is in Act- 
 even in lower
 forms no such division can be made and we cannot conceive a 
 duality in
 the Intellectual-Principle, one phase in some vague calm, another
 all astir. Under what form can we think of repose in the
 Intellectual Principle as contrasted with its movement or utterance?
 What would the quiescence of the one phase be as against the 
 energy of
 the others?
 
 No: the Intellectual-Principle is continuously itself,
 unchangeably constituted in stable Act. With movement- towards it or
 within it- we are in the realm of the Soul's operation: such act is
 a Reason-Principle emanating from it and entering into Soul, 
 thus made
 an Intellectual Soul, but in no sense creating an intermediate
 Principle to stand between the two.
 
 Nor are we warranted in affirming a plurality of Intellectual
 Principles on the ground that there is one that knows and thinks and
 another knowing that it knows and thinks. For whatever distinction
 be possible in the Divine between its Intellectual Act and its
 Consciousness of that Act, still all must be one projection not
 unaware of its own operation: it would be absurd to imagine any such
 unconsciousness in the Authentic Intelligence; the knowing principle
 must be one and the selfsame with that which knows of the knowing.
 
 The contrary supposition would give us two beings, one 
 that merely
 knows, and another separate being that knows of the act of knowing.
 
 If we are answered that the distinction is merely a 
 process of our
 thought, then, at once, the theory of a plurality in the Divine
 Hypostasis is abandoned: further, the question is opened whether our
 thought can entertain a knowing principle so narrowed to its knowing
 as not to know that it knows- a limitation which would be charged as
 imbecility even in ourselves, who if but of very ordinary moral
 force are always master of our emotions and mental processes.
 
 No: The Divine Mind in its mentation thinks itself; the object
 of the thought is nothing external: Thinker and Thought are one;
 therefore in its thinking and knowing it possesses itself, observes
 itself and sees itself not as something unconscious but as 
 knowing: in
 this Primal Knowing it must include, as one and the same Act, the
 knowledge of the knowing; and even the logical distinction mentioned
 above cannot be made in the case of the Divine; the very eternity of
 its self-thinking precludes any such separation between that
 intellective act and the consciousness of the act.
 
 The absurdity becomes still more blatant if we introduce yet a
 further distinction- after that which affirms the knowledge of the
 knowing, a third distinction affirming the knowing of the 
 knowledge of
 the knowing: yet there is no reason against carrying on the division
 for ever and ever.
 
 To increase the Primals by making the Supreme Mind engender the
 Reason-Principle, and this again engender in the Soul a 
 distinct power
 to act as mediator between Soul and the Supreme Mind, this is to
 deny intellection to the Soul, which would no longer derive 
 its Reason
 from the Intellectual-Principle but from an intermediate: the Soul
 then would possess not the Reason-Principle but an image of it: the
 Soul could not know the Intellectual-Principle; it could have no
 intellection.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Therefore we must affirm no more than these three Primals: we
 are not to introduce superfluous distinctions which their nature
 rejects. We are to proclaim one Intellectual-Principle unchangeably
 the same, in no way subject to decline, acting in imitation, as true
 as its nature allows, of the Father.
 
 And as to our own Soul we are to hold that it stands, in part,
 always in the presence of The Divine Beings, while in part it is
 concerned with the things of this sphere and in part 
 occupies a middle
 ground. It is one nature in graded powers; and sometimes the Soul in
 its entirety is borne along by the loftiest in itself and in the
 Authentic Existent; sometimes, the less noble part is 
 dragged down and
 drags the mid-soul with it, though the law is that the Soul may
 never succumb entire.
 
 The Soul's disaster falls upon it when it ceases to dwell in the
 perfect Beauty- the appropriate dwelling-place of that Soul which is
 no part and of which we too are no part- thence to pour 
 forth into the
 frame of the All whatsoever the All can hold of good and 
 beauty. There
 that Soul rests, free from all solicitude, not ruling by plan or
 policy, not redressing, but establishing order by the marvellous
 efficacy of its contemplation of the things above it.
 
 For the measure of its absorption in that vision is the 
 measure of
 its grace and power, and what it draws from this contemplation it
 communicates to the lower sphere, illuminated and 
 illuminating always.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Ever illuminated, receiving light unfailing, the All-Soul
 imparts it to the entire series of later Being which by this light
 is sustained and fostered and endowed with the fullest 
 measure of life
 that each can absorb. It may be compared with a central fire warming
 every receptive body within range.
 
 Our fire, however, is a thing of limited scope: given powers
 that have no limitation and are never cut off from the Authentic
 Existences, how imagine anything existing and yet failing to receive
 from them?
 
 It is of the essence of things that each gives of its being to
 another: without this communication, The Good would not be Good, nor
 the Intellectual-Principle an Intellective Principle, nor would Soul
 itself be what it is: the law is, "some life after the Primal Life,
 a second where there is a first; all linked in one unbroken 
 chain; all
 eternal; divergent types being engendered only in the sense of being
 secondary."
 
 In other words, things commonly described as generated have
 never known a beginning: all has been and will be. Nor can anything
 disappear unless where a later form is possible: without 
 such a future
 there can be no dissolution.
 
 If we are told that there is always Matter as a possible term,
 we ask why then should not Matter itself come to nothingness. If we
 are told it may, then we ask why it should ever have been generated.
 If the answer comes that it had its necessary place as the 
 ultimate of
 the series, we return that the necessity still holds.
 
 With Matter left aside as wholly isolated, the Divine Beings are
 not everywhere but in some bounded place, walled off, so to speak;
 if that is not possible, Matter itself must receive the Divine light
 [and so cannot be annihilated].
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. To those who assert that creation is the work of the 
 Soul after
 the failing of its wings, we answer that no such disgrace could
 overtake the Soul of the All. If they tell us of its falling, they
 must tell us also what caused the fall. And when did it take 
 place? If
 from eternity, then the Soul must be essentially a fallen 
 thing: if at
 some one moment, why not before that?
 
 We assert its creative act to be a proof not of decline 
 but rather
 of its steadfast hold. Its decline could consist only in its
 forgetting the Divine: but if it forgot, how could it create? Whence
 does it create but from the things it knew in the Divine? If it
 creates from the memory of that vision, it never fell. Even
 supposing it to be in some dim intermediate state, it need not be
 supposed more likely to decline: any inclination would be towards
 its Prior, in an effort to the clearer vision. If any memory at all
 remained, what other desire could it have than to retrace the way?
 
 What could it have been planning to gain by 
 world-creating? Glory?
 That would be absurd- a motive borrowed from the sculptors of our
 earth.
 
 Finally, if the Soul created by policy and not by sheer need of
 its nature, by being characteristically the creative power- how
 explain the making of this universe?
 
 And when will it destroy the work? If it repents of its 
 work, what
 is it waiting for? If it has not yet repented, then it will never
 repent: it must be already accustomed to the world, must be growing
 more tender towards it with the passing of time.
 
 Can it be waiting for certain souls still here? Long since would
 these have ceased returning for such re-birth, having known in
 former life the evils of this sphere; long since would they have
 foreborne to come.
 
 Nor may we grant that this world is of unhappy origin because
 there are many jarring things in it. Such a judgement would rate it
 too high, treating it as the same with the Intelligible Realm and
 not merely its reflection.
 
 And yet- what reflection of that world could be conceived more
 beautiful than this of ours? What fire could be a nobler 
 reflection of
 the fire there than the fire we know here? Or what other earth than
 this could have been modelled after that earth? And what globe more
 minutely perfect than this, or more admirably ordered in its course
 could have been conceived in the image of the self-centred 
 circling of
 the World of Intelligibles? And for a sun figuring the Divine
 sphere, if it is to be more splendid than the sun visible to us,
 what a sun it must be.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. Still more unreasonably:
 
 There are men, bound to human bodies and subject to 
 desire, grief,
 anger, who think so generously of their own faculty that they
 declare themselves in contact with the Intelligible World, but deny
 that the sun possesses a similar faculty less subject to 
 influence, to
 disorder, to change; they deny that it is any wiser than we, the
 late born, hindered by so many cheats on the way towards truth.
 
 Their own soul, the soul of the least of mankind, they declare
 deathless, divine; but the entire heavens and the stars within the
 heavens have had no communion with the Immortal Principle, though
 these are far purer and lovelier than their own souls- yet they are
 not blind to the order, the shapely pattern, the discipline 
 prevailing
 in the heavens, since they are the loudest in complaint of the
 disorder that troubles our earth. We are to imagine the 
 deathless Soul
 choosing of design the less worthy place, and preferring to abandon
 the nobler to the Soul that is to die.
 
 Equally unreasonable is their introduction of that other Soul
 which they piece together from the elements.
 
 How could any form or degree of life come about by a blend of
 the elements? Their conjunction could produce only a warm or cold or
 an intermediate substance, something dry or wet or intermediate.
 
 Besides, how could such a soul be a bond holding the 
 four elements
 together when it is a later thing and rises from them? And this
 element- soul is described as possessing consciousness and will and
 the rest- what can we think?
 
 Furthermore, these teachers, in their contempt for this creation
 and this earth, proclaim that another earth has been made for them
 into which they are to enter when they depart. Now this new earth is
 the Reason-Form [the Logos] of our world. Why should they desire to
 live in the archetype of a world abhorrent to them?
 
 Then again, what is the origin of that pattern world? It would
 appear, from the theory, that the Maker had already declined towards
 the things of this sphere before that pattern came into being.
 
 Now let us suppose the Maker craving to construct such an
 Intermediate World- though what motive could He have?- in addition
 to the Intellectual world which He eternally possesses. If 
 He made the
 mid-world first, what end was it to serve?
 
 To be a dwelling-place for Souls?
 
 How then did they ever fall from it? It exists in vain.
 
 If He made it later than this world- abstracting the formal-idea
 of this world and leaving the Matter out- the Souls that have come
 to know that intermediate sphere would have experienced 
 enough to keep
 them from entering this. If the meaning is simply that Souls exhibit
 the Ideal-Form of the Universe, what is there distinctive in the
 teaching?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. And, what are we to think of the new forms of being they
 introduce- their "Exiles" and "Impressions" and "Repentings"?
 
 If all comes to states of the Soul- "Repentance" when it has
 undergone a change of purpose; "Impressions" when it contemplates
 not the Authentic Existences but their simulacra- there is nothing
 here but a jargon invented to make a case for their school: all this
 terminology is piled up only to conceal their debt to the ancient
 Greek philosophy which taught, clearly and without bombast, 
 the ascent
 from the cave and the gradual advance of souls to a truer and truer
 vision.
 
 For, in sum, a part of their doctrine comes from Plato; all the
 novelties through which they seek to establish a philosophy of their
 own have been picked up outside of the truth.
 
 From Plato come their punishments, their rivers of the
 underworld and the changing from body to body; as for the plurality
 they assert in the Intellectual Realm- the Authentic Existent, the
 Intellectual-Principle, the Second Creator and the Soul- all this is
 taken over from the Timaeus, where we read:
 
 "As many Ideal-Forms as the Divine Mind beheld dwelling 
 within the
 Veritably Living Being, so many the Maker resolved should be 
 contained
 in this All."
 
 Misunderstanding their text, they conceived one Mind passively
 including within itself all that has being, another mind, a distinct
 existence, having vision, and a third planning the Universe- though
 often they substitute Soul for this planning Mind as the creating
 Principle- and they think that this third being is the Creator
 according to Plato.
 
 They are in fact quite outside of the truth in their
 identification of the Creator.
 
 In every way they misrepresent Plato's theory as to the method
 of creation as in many other respects they dishonour his teaching:
 they, we are to understand, have penetrated the Intellectual Nature,
 while Plato and all those other illustrious teachers have failed.
 
 They hope to get the credit of minute and exact identification
 by setting up a plurality of intellectual Essences; but in reality
 this multiplication lowers the Intellectual Nature to the 
 level of the
 Sense-Kind: their true course is to seek to reduce number to 
 the least
 possible in the Supreme, simply referring all things to the Second
 Hypostasis- which is all that exists as it is Primal Intellect and
 Reality and is the only thing that is good except only for the first
 Nature- and to recognize Soul as the third Principle, accounting for
 the difference among souls merely by diversity of experience and
 character. Instead of insulting those venerable teachers they should
 receive their doctrine with the respect due to the older thought and
 honour all that noble system- an immortal soul, an Intellectual and
 Intelligible Realm, the Supreme God, the Soul's need of emancipation
 from all intercourse with the body, the fact of separation from it,
 the escape from the world of process to the world of
 essential-being. These doctrines, all emphatically asserted by
 Plato, they do well to adopt: where they differ, they are at full
 liberty to speak their minds, but not to procure assent for their
 own theories by flaying and flouting the Greeks: where they have a
 divergent theory to maintain they must establish it by its 
 own merits,
 declaring their own opinions with courtesy and with philosophical
 method and stating the controverted opinion fairly; they must point
 their minds towards the truth and not hunt fame by insult, reviling
 and seeking in their own persons to replace men honoured by the fine
 intelligences of ages past.
 
 As a matter of fact the ancient doctrine of the Divine Essences
 was far the sounder and more instructed, and must be accepted by all
 not caught in the delusions that beset humanity: it is easy also to
 identify what has been conveyed in these later times from 
 the ancients
 with incongruous novelties- how for example, where they must set up
 a contradictory doctrine, they introduce a medley of generation and
 destruction, how they cavil at the Universe, how they make the Soul
 blameable for the association with body, how they revile the
 Administrator of this All, how they ascribe to the Creator, 
 identified
 with the Soul, the character and experiences appropriate to 
 partial be
 beings.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. That this world has neither beginning nor end but exists for
 ever as long as the Supreme stands is certainly no novel 
 teaching. And
 before this school rose it had been urged that commerce with the
 body is no gain to a Soul.
 
 But to treat the human Soul as a fair presentment of the Soul of
 the Universe is like picking out potters and blacksmiths and making
 them warrant for discrediting an entire well-ordered city.
 
 We must recognize how different is the governance 
 exercised by the
 All-Soul; the relation is not the same: it is not in fetters. Among
 the very great number of differences it should not have been
 overlooked that the We [the human Soul] lies under fetter; 
 and this in
 a second limitation, for the Body-Kind, already fettered within the
 All-Soul, imprisons all that it grasps.
 
 But the Soul of the Universe cannot be in bond to what itself
 has bound: it is sovereign and therefore immune of the lower things,
 over which we on the contrary are not masters. That in it which is
 directed to the Divine and Transcendent is ever unmingled, knows no
 encumbering; that in it which imparts life to the body admits
 nothing bodily to itself. It is the general fact that an 
 inset [as the
 Body], necessarily shares the conditions of its containing principle
 [as the Soul], and does not communicate its own conditions where
 that principle has an independent life: thus a graft will die if the
 stock dies, but the stock will live on by its proper life though the
 graft wither. The fire within your own self may be quenched, but the
 thing, fire, will exist still; and if fire itself were annihilated
 that would make no difference to the Soul, the Soul in the Supreme,
 but only to the plan of the material world; and if the other
 elements sufficed to maintain a Kosmos, the Soul in the Supreme
 would be unconcerned.
 
 The constitution of the All is very different from that of the
 single, separate forms of life: there, the established rule 
 commanding
 to permanence is sovereign; here things are like deserters kept to
 their own place and duty by a double bond; there is no 
 outlet from the
 All, and therefore no need of restraining or of driving errants back
 to bounds: all remains where from the beginning the Soul's nature
 appointed.
 
 The natural movement within the plan will be injurious 
 to anything
 whose natural tendency it opposes: one group will sweep 
 bravely onward
 with the great total to which it is adapted; the others, not able to
 comply with the larger order, are destroyed. A great choral is
 moving to its concerted plan; midway in the march, a tortoise is
 intercepted; unable to get away from the choral line it is trampled
 under foot; but if it could only range itself within the greater
 movement it too would suffer nothing.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. To ask why the Soul has created the Kosmos, is to ask 
 why there
 is a Soul and why a Creator creates. The question, also, implies a
 beginning in the eternal and, further, represents creation as the
 act of a changeful Being who turns from this to that.
 
 Those that so think must be instructed- if they would but bear
 with correction- in the nature of the Supernals, and brought 
 to desist
 from that blasphemy of majestic powers which comes so easily to
 them, where all should be reverent scruple.
 
 Even in the administration of the Universe there is no ground
 for such attack, for it affords manifest proof of the 
 greatness of the
 Intellectual Kind.
 
 This All that has emerged into life is no amorphous structure-
 like those lesser forms within it which are born night and day out
 of the lavishness of its vitality- the Universe is a life organized,
 effective, complex, all-comprehensive, displaying an unfathomable
 wisdom. How, then, can anyone deny that it is a clear image,
 beautifully formed, of the Intellectual Divinities? No doubt it is
 copy, not original; but that is its very nature; it cannot be at
 once symbol and reality. But to say that it is an inadequate copy is
 false; nothing has been left out which a beautiful representation
 within the physical order could include.
 
 Such a reproduction there must necessarily be- though not by
 deliberation and contrivance- for the Intellectual could not be the
 last of things, but must have a double Act, one within itself and
 one outgoing; there must, then, be something later than the Divine;
 for only the thing with which all power ends fails to pass downwards
 something of itself. In the Supreme there flourishes a marvellous
 vigour, and therefore it produces.
 
 Since there is no Universe nobler than this, is it not clear
 what this must be? A representation carrying down the features of
 the Intellectual Realm is necessary; there is no other Kosmos than
 this; therefore this is such a representation.
 
 This earth of ours is full of varied life-forms and of immortal
 beings; to the very heavens it is crowded. And the stars, 
 those of the
 upper and the under spheres, moving in their ordered path,
 fellow-travellers with the universe, how can they be less than gods?
 Surely they must be morally good: what could prevent them? All that
 occasions vice here below is unknown there evil of body, 
 perturbed and
 perturbing.
 
 Knowledge, too; in their unbroken peace, what hinders them from
 the intellectual grasp of the God-Head and the Intellectual 
 Gods? What
 can be imagined to give us a wisdom higher than belongs to the
 Supernals? Could anyone, not fallen to utter folly, bear with such
 an idea?
 
 Admitting that human Souls have descended under constraint of
 the All-Soul, are we to think the constrained the nobler? 
 Among Souls,
 what commands must be higher than what obeys. And if the coming was
 unconstrained, why find fault with a world you have chosen and can
 quit if you dislike it?
 
 And further, if the order of this Universe is such that we are
 able, within it, to practise wisdom and to live our earthly course
 by the Supernal, does not that prove it a dependency of the Divine?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. Wealth and poverty, and all inequalities of that order, are
 made ground of complaint. But this is to ignore that the Sage
 demands no equality in such matters: he cannot think that to own
 many things is to be richer or that the powerful have the better of
 the simple; he leaves all such preoccupations to another kind of
 man. He has learned that life on earth has two distinct 
 forms, the way
 of the Sage and the way of the mass, the Sage intent upon the
 sublimest, upon the realm above, while those of the more strictly
 human type fall, again, under two classes, the one reminiscent of
 virtue and therefore not without touch with good, the other mere
 populace, serving to provide necessaries to the better sort.
 
 But what of murder? What of the feebleness that brings men under
 slavery to the passions?
 
 Is it any wonder that there should be failing and error, not in
 the highest, the intellectual, Principle but in Souls that are like
 undeveloped children? And is not life justified even so if it is a
 training ground with its victors and its vanquished?
 
 You are wronged; need that trouble an immortal? You are put to
 death; you have attained your desire. And from the moment your
 citizenship of the world becomes irksome you are not bound to it.
 
 Our adversaries do not deny that even here there is a system of
 law and penalty: and surely we cannot in justice blame a dominion
 which awards to every one his due, where virtue has its honour, and
 vice comes to its fitting shame, in which there are not merely
 representations of the gods, but the gods themselves, watchers from
 above, and- as we read- easily rebutting human reproaches, since
 they lead all things in order from a beginning to an end, 
 allotting to
 each human being, as life follows life, a fortune shaped to all that
 has preceded- the destiny which, to those that do not penetrate it,
 becomes the matter of boorish insolence upon things divine.
 
 A man's one task is to strive towards making himself perfect-
 though not in the idea- really fatal to perfection- that to 
 be perfect
 is possible to himself alone.
 
 We must recognize that other men have attained the heights of
 goodness; we must admit the goodness of the celestial spirits, and
 above all of the gods- those whose presence is here but their
 contemplation in the Supreme, and loftiest of them, the lord of this
 All, the most blessed Soul. Rising still higher, we hymn the
 divinities of the Intellectual Sphere, and, above all these, the
 mighty King of that dominion, whose majesty is made patent 
 in the very
 multitude of the gods.
 
 It is not by crushing the divine unto a unity but by displaying
 its exuberance- as the Supreme himself has displayed it- that we
 show knowledge of the might of God, who, abidingly what He is, yet
 creates that multitude, all dependent on Him, existing by 
 Him and from
 Him.
 
 This Universe, too, exists by Him and looks to Him- the Universe
 as a whole and every God within it- and tells of Him to men, 
 all alike
 revealing the plan and will of the Supreme.
 
 These, in the nature of things, cannot be what He is, but that
 does not justify you in contempt of them, in pushing yourself
 forward as not inferior to them.
 
 The more perfect the man, the more compliant he is, even towards
 his fellows; we must temper our importance, not thrusting insolently
 beyond what our nature warrants; we must allow other beings, also,
 their place in the presence of the Godhead; we may not set ourselves
 alone next after the First in a dream-flight which deprives us of
 our power of attaining identity with the Godhead in the measure
 possible to the human Soul, that is to say, to the point of likeness
 to which the Intellectual-Principle leads us; to exalt 
 ourselves above
 the Intellectual-Principle is to fall from it.
 
 Yet imbeciles are found to accept such teaching at the mere
 sound of the words "You, yourself, are to be nobler than all else,
 nobler than men, nobler than even gods." Human audacity is 
 very great:
 a man once modest, restrained and simple hears, "You, yourself, are
 the child of God; those men whom you used to venerate, those beings
 whose worship they inherit from antiquity, none of these are His
 children; you without lifting a hand are nobler than the very
 heavens"; others take up the cry: the issue will be much as if in a
 crowd all equally ignorant of figures, one man were told that he
 stands a thousand cubic feet; he will naturally accept his thousand
 cubits even though the others present are said to measure only five
 cubits; he will merely tell himself that the thousand indicates a
 considerable figure.
 
 Another point: God has care for you; how then can He be
 indifferent to the entire Universe in which you exist?
 
 We may be told that He is too much occupied to look upon the
 Universe, and that it would not be right for Him to do so; yet, when
 He looks down and upon these people, is He not looking 
 outside Himself
 and upon the Universe in which they exist? If He cannot look outside
 Himself so as to survey the Kosmos, then neither does He look upon
 them.
 
 But they have no need of Him?
 
 The Universe has need of Him, and He knows its ordering and its
 indwellers and how far they belong to it and how far to the Supreme,
 and which of the men upon it are friends of God, mildly acquiescing
 with the Kosmic dispensation when in the total course of things some
 pain must be brought to them- for we are to look not to the single
 will of any man but to the universe entire, regarding every one
 according to worth but not stopping for such things where 
 all that may
 is hastening onward.
 
 Not one only kind of being is bent upon this quest, which brings
 bliss to whatsoever achieves, and earns for the others a future
 destiny in accord with their power. No man, therefore, may flatter
 himself that he alone is competent; a pretension is not a
 possession; many boast though fully conscious of their lack and many
 imagine themselves to possess what was never theirs and even to be
 alone in possessing what they alone of men never had.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. Under detailed investigation, many other tenets of this
 school- indeed we might say all- could be corrected with an
 abundance of proof. But I am withheld by regard for some of our own
 friends who fell in with this doctrine before joining our circle
 and, strangely, still cling to it.
 
 The school, no doubt, is free-spoken enough- whether in the set
 purpose of giving its opinions a plausible colour of verity or in
 honest belief- but we are addressing here our own acquaintances, not
 those people with whom we could make no way. We have spoken in the
 hope of preventing our friends from being perturbed by a party which
 brings, not proof- how could it?- but arbitrary, tyrannical 
 assertion;
 another style of address would be applicable to such as have the
 audacity to flout the noble and true doctrines of the august
 teachers of antiquity.
 
 That method we will not apply; anyone that has fully grasped the
 preceding discussion will know how to meet every point in the system.
 
 Only one other tenet of theirs will be mentioned before passing
 the matter; it is one which surpasses all the rest in sheer folly,
 if that is the word.
 
 They first maintain that the Soul and a certain "Wisdom"
 [Sophia] declined and entered this lower sphere though they leave us
 in doubt of whether the movement originated in Soul or in this
 Sophia of theirs, or whether the two are the same to them- then they
 tell us that the other Souls came down in the descent and that these
 members of Sophia took to themselves bodies, human bodies, for
 example.
 
 Yet in the same breath, that very Soul which was the occasion of
 descent to the others is declared not to have descended. "It knew no
 decline," but merely illuminated the darkness in such a way that an
 image of it was formed upon the Matter. Then, they shape an image of
 that image somewhere below- through the medium of Matter or of
 Materiality or whatever else of many names they choose to give it in
 their frequent change of terms, invented to darken their 
 doctrine- and
 so they bring into being what they call the Creator or Demiurge,
 then this lower is severed from his Mother [Sophia] and becomes the
 author of the Kosmos down to the latest of the succession of images
 constituting it.
 
 Such is the blasphemy of one of their writers.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. Now, in the first place, if the Soul has not actually come
 down but has illuminated the darkness, how can it truly be said to
 have declined? The outflow from it of something in the 
 nature of light
 does not justify the assertion of its decline; for that, it must
 make an actual movement towards the object lying in the lower realm
 and illuminate it by contact.
 
 If, on the other hand, the Soul keeps to its own place and
 illuminates the lower without directing any act towards that end,
 why should it alone be the illuminant? Why should not the Kosmos
 draw light also from the yet greater powers contained in the total
 of existence?
 
 Again, if the Soul possesses the plan of a Universe, and 
 by virtue
 of this plan illuminates it, why do not that illumination and the
 creating of the world take place simultaneously? Why must the Soul
 wait till the representations of the plan be made actual?
 
 Then again this Plan- the "Far Country" of their terminology-
 brought into being, as they hold, by the greater powers, could not
 have been the occasion of decline to the creators.
 
 Further, how explain that under this illumination the Matter of
 the Kosmos produces images of the order of Soul instead of mere
 bodily-nature? An image of Soul could not demand darkness or Matter,
 but wherever formed it would exhibit the character of the producing
 element and remain in close union with it.
 
 Next, is this image a real-being, or, as they say, an
 Intellection?
 
 If it is a reality, in what way does it differ from its
 original? By being a distinct form of the Soul? But then, since the
 original is the reasoning Soul, this secondary form must be the
 vegetative and generative Soul; and then, what becomes of the theory
 that it is produced for glory's sake, what becomes of the creation
 in arrogance and self-assertion? The theory puts an end also to
 creation by representation and, still more decidedly, to any
 thinking in the act; and what need is left for a creator creating by
 way of Matter and Image?
 
 If it is an Intellection, then we ask first "What justifies the
 name?" and next, "How does anything come into being unless the Soul
 give this Intellection creative power and how, after all, 
 can creative
 power reside in a created thing?" Are we to be told that it is a
 question of a first Image followed by a second?
 
 But this is quite arbitrary.
 
 And why is fire the first creation?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. And how does this image set to its task immediately after it
 comes into being?
 
 By memory of what it has seen?
 
 But it was utterly non-existent, it could have no vision, either
 it or the Mother they bestow upon it.
 
 Another difficulty: These people come upon earth not as
 Soul-Images but as veritable Souls; yet, by great stress and strain,
 one or two of them are able to stir beyond the limits of the world,
 and when they do attain Reminiscence barely carry with them some
 slight recollection of the Sphere they once knew: on the other hand,
 this Image, a new-comer into being, is able, they tell us- as also
 is its Mother- to form at least some dim representation of the
 celestial world. It is an Image, stamped in Matter, yet it not
 merely has the conception of the Supreme and adopts from that world
 the plan of this, but knows what elements serve the purpose. How,
 for instance, did it come to make fire before anything else? 
 What made
 it judge fire a better first than some other object?
 
 Again, if it created the fire of the Universe by 
 thinking of fire,
 why did it not make the Universe at a stroke by thinking of the
 Universe? It must have conceived the product complete from the
 first; the constituent elements would be embraced in that general
 conception.
 
 The creation must have been in all respects more according to
 the way of Nature than to that of the arts- for the arts are of
 later origin than Nature and the Universe, and even at the present
 stage the partial things brought into being by the natural Kinds do
 not follow any such order- first fire, then the several other
 elements, then the various blends of these- on the contrary 
 the living
 organism entire is encompassed and rounded off within the uterine
 germ. Why should not the material of the Universe be similarly
 embraced in a Kosmic Type in which earth, fire and the rest would be
 included? We can only suppose that these people themselves, acting
 by their more authentic Soul, would have produced the world by such
 a process, but that the Creator had not wit to do so.
 
 And yet to conceive the vast span of the Heavens- to be great in
 that degree- to devise the obliquity of the Zodiac and the circling
 path of all the celestial bodies beneath it, and this earth of ours-
 and all in such a way that reason can be given for the plan- this
 could never be the work of an Image; it tells of that Power [the
 All-Soul] next to the very Highest Beings.
 
 Against their will, they themselves admit this: their
 "outshining upon the darkness," if the doctrine is sifted, makes it
 impossible to deny the true origins of the Kosmos.
 
 Why should this down-shining take place unless such a process
 belonged to a universal law?
 
 Either the process is in the order of Nature or against that
 order. If it is in the nature of things, it must have taken 
 place from
 eternity; if it is against the nature of things, then the breach of
 natural right exists in the Supreme also; evil antedates this world;
 the cause of evil is not the world; on the contrary the 
 Supreme is the
 evil to us; instead of the Soul's harm coming from this sphere, we
 have this Sphere harmed by the Soul.
 
 In fine, the theory amounts to making the world one of the
 Primals, and with it the Matter from which it emerges.
 
 The Soul that declined, they tell us, saw and illuminated the
 already existent Darkness. Now whence came that Darkness?
 
 If they tell us that the Soul created the Darkness by 
 its Decline,
 then, obviously, there was nowhere for the Soul to decline to; the
 cause of the decline was not the Darkness but the very nature of the
 Soul. The theory, therefore, refers the entire process to 
 pre-existing
 compulsions: the guilt inheres in the Primal Beings.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. Those, then, that censure the constitution of the Kosmos do
 not understand what they are doing or where this audacity leads
 them. They do not understand that there is a successive order of
 Primals, Secondaries, Tertiaries and so on continuously to the
 Ultimates; that nothing is to be blamed for being inferior to the
 First; that we can but accept, meekly, the constitution of the
 total, and make our best way towards the Primals, 
 withdrawing from the
 tragic spectacle, as they see it, of the Kosmic spheres- which in
 reality are all suave graciousness.
 
 And what, after all, is there so terrible in these Spheres with
 which it is sought to frighten people unaccustomed to thinking,
 never trained in an instructive and coherent gnosis?
 
 Even the fact that their material frame is of fire does not make
 them dreadful; their Movements are in keeping with the All and with
 the Earth: but what we must consider in them is the Soul, that on
 which these people base their own title to honour.
 
 And, yet, again, their material frames are pre-eminent 
 in vastness
 and beauty, as they cooperate in act and in influence with the
 entire order of Nature, and can never cease to exist as long as the
 Primals stand; they enter into the completion of the All of 
 which they
 are major Parts.
 
 If men rank highly among other living Beings, much more do
 these, whose office in the All is not to play the tyrant but to
 serve towards beauty and order. The action attributed to them must
 be understood as a foretelling of coming events, while the causing
 of all the variety is due, in part to diverse destinies- for there
 cannot be one lot for the entire body of men- in part to the birth
 moment, in part to wide divergencies of place, in part to states of
 the Souls.
 
 Once more, we have no right to ask that all men shall be good,
 or to rush into censure because such universal virtue is not 
 possible:
 this would be repeating the error of confusing our sphere with the
 Supreme and treating evil as a nearly negligible failure in 
 wisdom- as
 good lessened and dwindling continuously, a continuous fading out;
 it would be like calling the Nature-Principle evil because it is not
 Sense-Perception and the thing of sense evil for not being a
 Reason-Principle. If evil is no more than that, we will be obliged
 to admit evil in the Supreme also, for there, too, Soul is less
 exalted than the Intellectual-Principle, and That too has its
 Superior.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. In yet another way they infringe still more gravely upon the
 inviolability of the Supreme.
 
 In the sacred formulas they inscribe, purporting to address the
 Supernal Beings- not merely the Soul but even the Transcendents-
 they are simply uttering spells and appeasements and 
 evocations in the
 idea that these Powers will obey a call and be led about by a word
 from any of us who is in some degree trained to use the appropriate
 forms in the appropriate way- certain melodies, certain sounds,
 specially directed breathings, sibilant cries, and all else to which
 is ascribed magic potency upon the Supreme. Perhaps they would
 repudiate any such intention: still they must explain how 
 these things
 act upon the unembodied: they do not see that the power they 
 attribute
 to their own words is so much taken away from the majesty of the
 divine.
 
 They tell us they can free themselves of diseases.
 
 If they meant, by temperate living and an appropriate 
 regime, they
 would be right and in accordance with all sound knowledge. But they
 assert diseases to be Spirit-Beings and boast of being able to expel
 them by formula: this pretension may enhance their 
 importance with the
 crowd, gaping upon the powers of magicians; but they can never
 persuade the intelligent that disease arises otherwise than from
 such causes as overstrain, excess, deficiency, putrid decay; in a
 word, some variation whether from within or from without.
 
 The nature of illness is indicated by its very cure. A motion, a
 medicine, the letting of blood, and the disease shifts down and
 away; sometimes scantiness of nourishment restores the system:
 presumably the Spiritual power gets hungry or is debilitated by the
 purge. Either this Spirit makes a hasty exit or it remains within.
 If it stays, how does the disease disappear, with the cause still
 present? If it quits the place, what has driven it out? Has anything
 happened to it? Are we to suppose it throve on the disease? In that
 case the disease existed as something distinct from the
 Spirit-Power. Then again, if it steps in where no cause of sickness
 exists, why should there be anything else but illness? If there must
 be such a cause, the Spirit is unnecessary: that cause is sufficient
 to produce that fever. As for the notion, that just when the cause
 presents itself, the watchful Spirit leaps to incorporate itself
 with it, this is simply amusing.
 
 But the manner and motive of their teaching have been 
 sufficiently
 exhibited; and this was the main purpose of the discussion here upon
 their Spirit-Powers. I leave it to yourselves to read the books and
 examine the rest of the doctrine: you will note all through how our
 form of philosophy inculcates simplicity of character and honest
 thinking in addition to all other good qualities, how it cultivates
 reverence and not arrogant self-assertion, how its boldness is
 balanced by reason, by careful proof, by cautious progression, by
 the utmost circumspection- and you will compare those other 
 systems to
 one proceeding by this method. You will find that the tenets of
 their school have been huddled together under a very different plan:
 they do not deserve any further examination here.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. There is, however, one matter which we must on no account
 overlook- the effect of these teachings upon the hearers led by them
 into despising the world and all that is in it.
 
 There are two theories as to the attainment of the End of life.
 The one proposes pleasure, bodily pleasure, as the term; the other
 pronounces for good and virtue, the desire of which comes 
 from God and
 moves, by ways to be studied elsewhere, towards God.
 
 Epicurus denies a Providence and recommends pleasure and its
 enjoyment, all that is left to us: but the doctrine under discussion
 is still more wanton; it carps at Providence and the Lord of
 Providence; it scorns every law known to us; immemorial 
 virtue and all
 restraint it makes into a laughing stock, lest any loveliness be
 seen on earth; it cuts at the root of all orderly living, and of the
 righteousness which, innate in the moral sense, is made perfect by
 thought and by self-discipline: all that would give us a noble human
 being is gone. What is left for them except where the pupil 
 by his own
 character betters the teaching- comes to pleasure, self-seeking, the
 grudge of any share with one's fellows, the pursuit of advantage.
 
 Their error is that they know nothing good here: all 
 they care for
 is something else to which they will at some future time apply
 themselves: yet, this world, to those that have known it 
 once, must be
 the starting-point of the pursuit: arrived here from out of 
 the divine
 nature, they must inaugurate their effort by some earthly
 correction. The understanding of beauty is not given except to a
 nature scorning the delight of the body, and those that have no part
 in well-doing can make no step towards the Supernal.
 
 This school, in fact, is convicted by its neglect of all mention
 of virtue: any discussion of such matters is missing utterly: we are
 not told what virtue is or under what different kinds it appears;
 there is no word of all the numerous and noble reflections upon it
 that have come down to us from the ancients; we do not learn what
 constitutes it or how it is acquired, how the Soul is tended, how it
 is cleaned. For to say "Look to God" is not helpful without some
 instruction as to what this looking imports: it might very well be
 said that one can "look" and still sacrifice no pleasure, 
 still be the
 slave of impulse, repeating the word God but held in the 
 grip of every
 passion and making no effort to master any. Virtue, advancing
 towards the Term and, linked with thought, occupying a Soul makes
 God manifest: God on the lips, without a good conduct of life, is a
 word.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. On the other hand, to despise this Sphere, and the 
 Gods within
 it or anything else that is lovely, is not the way to goodness.
 
 Every evil-doer began by despising the Gods; and one not
 previously corrupt, taking to this contempt, even though in other
 respects not wholly bad, becomes an evil-doer by the very fact.
 
 Besides, in this slighting of the Mundane Gods and the world,
 the honour they profess for the gods of the Intellectual Sphere
 becomes an inconsistency; Where we love, our hearts are warm also to
 the Kin of the beloved; we are not indifferent to the children of
 our friend. Now every Soul is a child of that Father; but in the
 heavenly bodies there are Souls, intellective, holy, much closer to
 the Supernal Beings than are ours; for how can this Kosmos be a
 thing cut off from That and how imagine the gods in it to 
 stand apart?
 
 But of this matter we have treated elsewhere: here we urge that
 where there is contempt for the Kin of the Supreme the knowledge of
 the Supreme itself is merely verbal.
 
 What sort of piety can make Providence stop short of earthly
 concerns or set any limit whatsoever to it?
 
 And what consistency is there in this school when they proceed
 to assert that Providence cares for them, though for them alone?
 
 And is this Providence over them to be understood of their
 existence in that other world only or of their lives here as well?
 If in the other world, how came they to this? If in this world, why
 are they not already raised from it?
 
 Again, how can they deny that the Lord of Providence is here?
 How else can He know either that they are here, or that in their
 sojourn here they have not forgotten Him and fallen away? 
 And if He is
 aware of the goodness of some, He must know of the wickedness of
 others, to distinguish good from bad. That means that He is 
 present to
 all, is, by whatever mode, within this Universe. The Universe,
 therefore, must be participant in Him.
 
 If He is absent from the Universe, He is absent from yourselves,
 and you can have nothing to tell about Him or about the powers that
 come after Him.
 
 But, allowing that a Providence reaches to you from the world
 beyond- making any concession to your liking- it remains 
 none the less
 certain that this world holds from the Supernal and is not deserted
 and will not be: a Providence watching entires is even more likely
 than one over fragments only; and similarly, Participation is more
 perfect in the case of the All-Soul- as is shown, further, 
 by the very
 existence of things and the wisdom manifest in their existence. Of
 those that advance these wild pretensions, who is so well ordered,
 so wise, as the Universe? The comparison is laughable, utterly out
 of place; to make it, except as a help towards truth, would be
 impiety.
 
 The very question can be entertained by no intelligent being but
 only by one so blind, so utterly devoid of perception and thought,
 so far from any vision of the Intellectual Universe as not 
 even to see
 this world of our own.
 
 For who that truly perceives the harmony of the 
 Intellectual Realm
 could fail, if he has any bent towards music, to answer to 
 the harmony
 in sensible sounds? What geometrician or arithmetician could fail to
 take pleasure in the symmetries, correspondences and principles of
 order observed in visible things? Consider, even, the case of
 pictures: those seeing by the bodily sense the productions of the
 art of painting do not see the one thing in the one only 
 way; they are
 deeply stirred by recognizing in the objects depicted to the eyes
 the presentation of what lies in the idea, and so are called to
 recollection of the truth- the very experience out of which Love
 rises. Now, if the sight of Beauty excellently reproduced upon a
 face hurries the mind to that other Sphere, surely no one seeing the
 loveliness lavish in the world of sense- this vast orderliness, the
 Form which the stars even in their remoteness display- no 
 one could be
 so dull-witted, so immoveable, as not to be carried by all this to
 recollection, and gripped by reverent awe in the thought of all
 this, so great, sprung from that greatness. Not to answer thus could
 only be to have neither fathomed this world nor had any 
 vision of that
 other.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. Perhaps the hate of this school for the corporeal is due to
 their reading of Plato who inveighs against body as a grave
 hindrance to Soul and pronounces the corporeal to be
 characteristically the inferior.
 
 Then let them for the moment pass over the corporeal element in
 the Universe and study all that still remains.
 
 They will think of the Intellectual Sphere which includes within
 itself the Ideal-Form realized in the Kosmos. They will think of the
 Souls, in their ordered rank, that produce incorporeal magnitude and
 lead the Intelligible out towards spatial extension, so that finally
 the thing of process becomes, by its magnitude, as adequate a
 representation as possible of the principle void of parts 
 which is its
 model- the greatness of power there being translated here into
 greatness of bulk. Then whether they think of the Kosmic Sphere [the
 All-Soul] as already in movement under the guidance of that power of
 God which holds it through and through, beginning and middle and
 end, or whether they consider it as in rest and exercising as yet no
 outer governance: either approach will lead to a true appreciation
 of the Soul that conducts this Universe.
 
 Now let them set body within it- not in the sense that Soul
 suffers any change but that, since "In the Gods there can be no
 grudging," it gives to its inferior all that any partial thing has
 strength to receive and at once their conception of the 
 Kosmos must be
 revised; they cannot deny that the Soul of the Kosmos has exercised
 such a weight of power as to have brought the corporeal-principle,
 in itself unlovely, to partake of good and beauty to the 
 utmost of its
 receptivity- and to a pitch which stirs Souls, beings of the divine
 order.
 
 These people may no doubt say that they themselves feel no such
 stirring, and that they see no difference between beautiful and ugly
 forms of body; but, at that, they can make no distinction between
 the ugly and the beautiful in conduct; sciences can have no beauty;
 there can be none in thought; and none, therefore, in God. This
 world descends from the Firsts: if this world has no beauty, neither
 has its Source; springing thence, this world, too, must have its
 beautiful things. And while they proclaim their contempt for earthly
 beauty, they would do well to ignore that of youths and women so as
 not to be overcome by incontinence.
 
 In fine, we must consider that their self-satisfaction could not
 turn upon a contempt for anything indisputably base; theirs is the
 perverse pride of despising what was once admired.
 
 We must always keep in mind that the beauty in a partial thing
 cannot be identical with that in a whole; nor can any several
 objects be as stately as the total.
 
 And we must recognize, that, even in the world of sense and
 part, there are things of a loveliness comparable to that of the
 Celestials- forms whose beauty must fill us with veneration for
 their creator and convince us of their origin in the divine, forms
 which show how ineffable is the beauty of the Supreme since they
 cannot hold us but we must, though in all admiration, leave these
 for those. Further, wherever there is interior beauty, we may be
 sure that inner and outer correspond; where the interior is vile,
 all is brought low by that flaw in the dominants.
 
 Nothing base within can be beautiful without- at least 
 not with an
 authentic beauty, for there are examples of a good exterior 
 not sprung
 from a beauty dominant within; people passing as handsome but
 essentially base have that, a spurious and superficial beauty: if
 anyone tells me he has seen people really fine-looking but
 interiorly vile, I can only deny it; we have here simply a false
 notion of personal beauty; unless, indeed, the inner vileness were
 an accident in a nature essentially fine; in this Sphere there are
 many obstacles to self-realization.
 
 In any case the All is beautiful, and there can be no obstacle
 to its inner goodness: where the nature of a thing does not comport
 perfection from the beginning, there may be a failure in complete
 expression; there may even be a fall to vileness, but the All never
 knew a childlike immaturity; it never experienced a progress
 bringing novelty into it; it never had bodily growth: there was
 nowhere from whence it could take such increment; it was always the
 All-Container.
 
 And even for its Soul no one could imagine any such a path of
 process: or, if this were conceded, certainly it could not be
 towards evil.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. But perhaps this school will maintain that, while their
 teaching leads to a hate and utter abandonment of the body, 
 ours binds
 the Soul down in it.
 
 In other words: two people inhabit the one stately house; one of
 them declaims against its plan and against its Architect, 
 but none the
 less maintains his residence in it; the other makes no complaint,
 asserts the entire competency of the Architect and waits cheerfully
 for the day when he may leave it, having no further need of a house:
 the malcontent imagines himself to be the wiser and to be the
 readier to leave because he has learned to repeat that the walls are
 of soulless stone and timber and that the place falls far short of a
 true home; he does not see that his only distinction is in not being
 able to bear with necessity assuming that his conduct, his
 grumbling, does not cover a secret admiration for the beauty of
 those same "stones." As long as we have bodies we must inhabit the
 dwellings prepared for us by our good sister the Soul in her vast
 power of labourless creation.
 
 Or would this school reject the word Sister? They are willing to
 address the lowest of men as brothers; are they capable of 
 such raving
 as to disown the tie with the Sun and the powers of the Heavens and
 the very Soul of the Kosmos? Such kinship, it is true, is not for
 the vile; it may be asserted only of those that have become good and
 are no longer body but embodied Soul and of a quality to inhabit the
 body in a mode very closely resembling the indwelling. of 
 the All-Soul
 in the universal frame. And this means continence, self-restraint,
 holding staunch against outside pleasure and against outer
 spectacle, allowing no hardship to disturb the mind. The All-Soul is
 immune from shock; there is nothing that can affect it: but 
 we, in our
 passage here, must call on virtue in repelling these 
 assaults, reduced
 for us from the beginning by a great conception of life, annulled by
 matured strength.
 
 Attaining to something of this immunity, we begin to reproduce
 within ourselves the Soul of the vast All and of the heavenly
 bodies: when we are come to the very closest resemblance, all the
 effort of our fervid pursuit will be towards that goal to which they
 also tend; their contemplative vision becomes ours, prepared as we
 are, first by natural disposition and afterwards by all this 
 training,
 for that state which is theirs by the Principle of their Being.
 
 This school may lay claim to vision as a dignity reserved to
 themselves, but they are not any the nearer to vision by the 
 claim- or
 by the boast that while the celestial powers, bound for ever to the
 ordering of the Heavens, can never stand outside the material
 universe, they themselves have their freedom in their death. 
 This is a
 failure to grasp the very notion of "standing outside," a failure to
 appreciate the mode in which the All-Soul cares for the unensouled.
 
 No: it is possible to go free of love for the body; to be
 clean-living, to disregard death; to know the Highest and aim at
 that other world; not to slander, as negligent in the quest, others
 who are able for it and faithful to it; and not to err with 
 those that
 deny vital motion to the stars because to our sense they stand
 still- the error which in another form leads this school to 
 deny outer
 vision to the Star-Nature, only because they do not see the
 Star-Soul in outer manifestation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THE THIRD ENNEAD
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIRST TRACTATE.
 
 
 FATE.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. In the two orders of things- those whose existence is that of
 process and those in whom it is Authentic Being- there is a 
 variety of
 possible relation to Cause.
 
 Cause might conceivably underly all the entities in both 
 orders or
 none in either. It might underly some, only, in each order, 
 the others
 being causeless. It might, again, underly the Realm of Process
 universally while in the Realm of Authentic Existence some 
 things were
 caused, others not, or all were causeless. Conceivably, on the other
 hand, the Authentic Existents are all caused while in the Realm of
 Process some things are caused and others not, or all are causeless.
 
 Now, to begin with the Eternal Existents:
 
 The Firsts among these, by the fact that they are Firsts, cannot
 be referred to outside Causes; but all such as depend upon those
 Firsts may be admitted to derive their Being from them.
 
 And in all cases the Act may be referred to the Essence [as its
 cause], for their Essence consists, precisely, in giving forth an
 appropriate Act.
 
 As for Things of Process- or for Eternal Existents whose Act is
 not eternally invariable- we must hold that these are due to Cause;
 Causelessness is quite inadmissible; we can make no place here for
 unwarranted "slantings," for sudden movement of bodies apart from
 any initiating power, for precipitate spurts in a soul with 
 nothing to
 drive it into the new course of action. Such causelessness would
 bind the Soul under an even sterner compulsion, no longer master of
 itself, but at the mercy of movements apart from will and cause.
 Something willed- within itself or without- something desired, must
 lead it to action; without motive it can have no motion.
 
 On the assumption that all happens by Cause, it is easy to
 discover the nearest determinants of any particular act or state and
 to trace it plainly to them.
 
 The cause of a visit to the centre of affairs will be that one
 thinks it necessary to see some person or to receive a debt, or, in
 a word, that one has some definite motive or impulse confirmed by a
 judgement of expediency. Sometimes a condition may be referred to
 the arts, the recovery of health for instance to medical science and
 the doctor. Wealth has for its cause the discovery of a treasure or
 the receipt of a gift, or the earning of money by manual or
 intellectual labour. The child is traced to the father as its Cause
 and perhaps to a chain of favourable outside circumstances such as a
 particular diet or, more immediately, a special organic aptitude or
 a wife apt to childbirth.
 
 And the general cause of all is Nature.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. But to halt at these nearest determinants, not to be 
 willing to
 penetrate deeper, indicates a sluggish mind, a dullness to all that
 calls us towards the primal and transcendent causes.
 
 How comes it that the same surface causes produce different
 results? There is moonshine, and one man steals and the other does
 not: under the influence of exactly similar surroundings one 
 man falls
 sick and the other keeps well; an identical set of operations makes
 one rich and leaves another poor. The differences amongst us in
 manners, in characters, in success, force us to go still 
 further back.
 
 Men therefore have never been able to rest at the surface causes.
 
 One school postulates material principles, such as 
 atoms; from the
 movement, from the collisions and combinations of these, it derives
 the existence and the mode of being of all particular phenomena,
 supposing that all depends upon how these atoms are agglomerated,
 how they act, how they are affected; our own impulses and states,
 even, are supposed to be determined by these principles.
 
 Such teaching, then, obtrudes this compulsion, an atomic Anagke,
 even upon Real Being. Substitute, for the atoms, any other material
 entities as principles and the cause of all things, and at once Real
 Being becomes servile to the determination set up by them.
 
 Others rise to the first-principle of all that exists and from
 it derive all they tell of a cause penetrating all things, not
 merely moving all but making each and everything; but they pose this
 as a fate and a supremely dominating cause; not merely all else that
 comes into being, but even our own thinking and thoughts would
 spring from its movement, just as the several members of an animal
 move not at their own choice but at the dictation of the leading
 principle which animal life presupposes.
 
 Yet another school fastens on the universal Circuit as embracing
 all things and producing all by its motion and by the positions and
 mutual aspect of the planets and fixed stars in whose power of
 foretelling they find warrant for the belief that this Circuit is
 the universal determinant.
 
 Finally, there are those that dwell on the interconnection of
 the causative forces and on their linked descent- every later
 phenomenon following upon an earlier, one always leading back to
 others by which it arose and without which it could not be, and the
 latest always subservient to what went before them- but this is
 obviously to bring in fate by another path. This school may be
 fairly distinguished into two branches; a section which makes all
 depend upon some one principle and a section which ignores such a
 unity.
 
 Of this last opinion we will have something to say, but for the
 moment we will deal with the former, taking the others in their turn.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. "Atoms" or "elements"- it is in either case an absurdity, an
 impossibility, to hand over the universe and its contents to
 material entities, and out of the disorderly swirl thus occasioned
 to call order, reasoning, and the governing soul into being; but the
 atomic origin is, if we may use the phrase, the most impossible.
 
 A good deal of truth has resulted from the discussion of this
 subject; but, even to admit such principles does not compel us to
 admit universal compulsion or any kind of "fate."
 
 Suppose the atoms to exist:
 
 These atoms are to move, one downwards- admitting a down and an
 up- another slant-wise, all at haphazard, in a confused conflict.
 Nothing here is orderly; order has not come into being, though the
 outcome, this Universe, when it achieves existence, is all order;
 and thus prediction and divination are utterly impossible, whether
 by the laws of the science- what science can operate where 
 there is no
 order?- or by divine possession and inspiration, which no 
 less require
 that the future be something regulated.
 
 Material entities exposed to all this onslaught may very well be
 under compulsion to yield to whatsoever the atoms may bring: 
 but would
 anyone pretend that the acts and states of a soul or mind could be
 explained by any atomic movements? How can we imagine that the
 onslaught of an atom, striking downwards or dashing in from any
 direction, could force the soul to definite and necessary reasonings
 or impulses or into any reasonings, impulses or thoughts at all,
 necessary or otherwise? And what of the soul's resistance to bodily
 states? What movement of atoms could compel one man to be a
 geometrician, set another studying arithmetic or astronomy, lead a
 third to the philosophic life? In a word, if we must go, 
 like soulless
 bodies, wherever bodies push and drive us, there is an end to our
 personal act and to our very existence as living beings.
 
 The School that erects other material forces into 
 universal causes
 is met by the same reasoning: we say that while these can warm us
 and chill us, and destroy weaker forms of existence, they can be
 causes of nothing that is done in the sphere of mind or 
 soul: all this
 must be traceable to quite another kind of Principle.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. Another theory:
 
 The Universe is permeated by one Soul, Cause of all things and
 events; every separate phenomenon as a member of a whole moves in
 its place with the general movement; all the various causes spring
 into action from one source: therefore, it is argued, the entire
 descending claim of causes and all their interaction must follow
 inevitably and so constitute a universal determination. A plant
 rises from a root, and we are asked on that account to 
 reason that not
 only the interconnection linking the root to all the members 
 and every
 member to every other but the entire activity and experience of the
 plant, as well, must be one organized overruling, a "destiny" of the
 plant.
 
 But such an extremity of determination, a destiny so
 all-pervasive, does away with the very destiny that is affirmed: it
 shatters the sequence and co-operation of causes.
 
 It would be unreasonable to attribute to destiny the movement of
 our limbs dictated by the mind and will: this is no case of
 something outside bestowing motion while another thing accepts it
 and is thus set into action; the mind itself is the prime mover.
 
 Similarly in the case of the universal system; if all that
 performs act and is subject to experience constitutes one substance,
 if one thing does not really produce another thing under causes
 leading back continuously one to another, then it is not a truth
 that all happens by causes, there is nothing but a rigid 
 unity. We are
 no "We": nothing is our act; our thought is not ours; our decisions
 are the reasoning of something outside ourselves; we are no more
 agents than our feet are kickers when we use them to kick with.
 
 No; each several thing must be a separate thing; there must be
 acts and thoughts that are our own; the good and evil done by each
 human being must be his own; and it is quite certain that we must
 not lay any vileness to the charge of the All.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. But perhaps the explanation of every particular act 
 or event is
 rather that they are determined by the spheric movement- the Phora-
 and by the changing position of the heavenly bodies as these stand
 at setting or rising or in mid-course and in various aspects 
 with each
 other.
 
 Augury, it is urged, is able from these indications to foretell
 what is to happen not merely to the universe as a whole, but even to
 individuals, and this not merely as regards external conditions of
 fortune but even as to the events of the mind. We observe, too, how
 growth or check in other orders of beings- animals and Plants- is
 determined by their sympathetic relations with the heavenly 
 bodies and
 how widely they are influenced by them, how, for example, the
 various countries show a different produce according to their
 situation on the earth and especially their lie towards the sun. And
 the effect of place is not limited to plants and animals; it rules
 human beings too, determining their appearance, their height and
 colour, their mentality and their desires, their pursuits and their
 moral habit. Thus the universal circuit would seem to be the monarch
 of the All.
 
 Now a first answer to this theory is that its advocates have
 merely devised another shift to immolate to the heavenly bodies all
 that is ours, our acts of will and our states, all the evil 
 in us, our
 entire personality; nothing is allowed to us; we are left to 
 be stones
 set rolling, not men, not beings whose nature implies a task.
 
 But we must be allowed our own- with the understanding that to
 what is primarily ours, our personal holding, there is added some
 influx from the All- the distinction must be made between our
 individual act and what is thrust upon us: we are not to be
 immolated to the stars.
 
 Place and climate, no doubt, produce constitutions warmer or
 colder; and the parents tell on the offspring, as is seen in the
 resemblance between them, very general in personal appearance and
 noted also in some of the unreflecting states of the mind.
 
 None the less, in spite of physical resemblance and similar
 environment, we observe the greatest difference in temperament and
 in ideas: this side of the human being, then, derives from some
 quite other Principle [than any external causation or destiny]. A
 further confirmation is found in the efforts we make to correct both
 bodily constitution and mental aspirations.
 
 If the stars are held to be causing principles on the ground of
 the possibility of foretelling individual fate or fortune from
 observation of their positions, then the birds and all the other
 things which the soothsayer observes for divination must equally be
 taken as causing what they indicate.
 
 Some further considerations will help to clarify this matter:
 
 The heavens are observed at the moment of a birth and the
 individual fate is thence predicted in the idea that the stars are
 no mere indications, but active causes, of the future events.
 Sometimes the Astrologers tell of noble birth; "the child is born of
 highly placed parents"; yet how is it possible to make out the stars
 to be causes of a condition which existed in the father and mother
 previously to that star pattern on which the prediction is based?
 
 And consider still further:
 
 They are really announcing the fortunes of parents from the
 birth of children; the character and career of children are included
 in the predictions as to the parents- they predict for the yet
 unborn!- in the lot of one brother they are foretelling the death of
 another; a girl's fate includes that of a future husband, a 
 boy's that
 of a wife.
 
 Now, can we think that the star-grouping over any 
 particular birth
 can be the cause of what stands already announced in the facts about
 the parents? Either the previous star-groupings were the
 determinants of the child's future career or, if they were not, then
 neither is the immediate grouping. And notice further that physical
 likeness to the parents- the Astrologers hold- is of purely domestic
 origin: this implies that ugliness and beauty are so caused 
 and not by
 astral movements.
 
 Again, there must at one and the same time be a widespread
 coming to birth- men, and the most varied forms of animal life at
 the same moment- and these should all be under the one destiny since
 the one pattern rules at the moment; how explain that identical
 star-groupings give here the human form, there the animal?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. But in fact everything follows its own Kind; the birth is a
 horse because it comes from the Horse Kind, a man by springing from
 the Human Kind; offspring answers to species. Allow the 
 kosmic circuit
 its part, a very powerful influence upon the thing brought 
 into being:
 allow the stars a wide material action upon the bodily part of the
 man, producing heat and cold and their natural resultants in the
 physical constitution; still does such action explain character,
 vocation and especially all that seems quite independent of material
 elements, a man taking to letters, to geometry, to gambling, and
 becoming an originator in any of these pursuits? And can we imagine
 the stars, divine beings, bestowing wickedness? And what of 
 a doctrine
 that makes them wreak vengeance, as for a wrong, because they are in
 their decline or are being carried to a position beneath the 
 earth- as
 if a decline from our point of view brought any change to
 themselves, as if they ever ceased to traverse the heavenly spheres
 and to make the same figure around the earth.
 
 Nor may we think that these divine beings lose or gain 
 in goodness
 as they see this one or another of the company in various 
 aspects, and
 that in their happier position they are benignant to us and, less
 pleasantly situated, turn maleficent. We can but believe that their
 circuit is for the protection of the entirety of things while they
 furnish the incidental service of being letters on which the augur,
 acquainted with that alphabet, may look and read the future 
 from their
 pattern- arriving at the thing signified by such analogies as that a
 soaring bird tells of some lofty event.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. It remains to notice the theory of the one Causing-Principle
 alleged to interweave everything with everything else, to make
 things into a chain, to determine the nature and condition of each
 phenomenon- a Principle which, acting through seminal Reason-Forms-
 Logoi Spermatikoi- elaborates all that exists and happens.
 
 The doctrine is close to that which makes the Soul of 
 the Universe
 the source and cause of all condition and of all movement whether
 without or- supposing that we are allowed as individuals some little
 power towards personal act- within ourselves.
 
 But it is the theory of the most rigid and universal Necessity:
 all the causative forces enter into the system, and so every several
 phenomenon rises necessarily; where nothing escapes Destiny, nothing
 has power to check or to change. Such forces beating upon us, as it
 were, from one general cause leave us no resource but to go 
 where they
 drive. All our ideas will be determined by a chain of 
 previous causes;
 our doings will be determined by those ideas; personal action
 becomes a mere word. That we are the agents does not save our
 freedom when our action is prescribed by those causes; we have
 precisely what belongs to everything that lives, to infants guided
 by blind impulses, to lunatics; all these act; why, even fire acts;
 there is act in everything that follows the plan of its being,
 servilely.
 
 No one that sees the implications of this theory can hesitate:
 unable to halt at such a determinant principle, we seek for other
 explanations of our action.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. What can this other cause be; one standing above those
 treated of; one that leaves nothing causeless, that 
 preserves sequence
 and order in the Universe and yet allows ourselves some reality and
 leaves room for prediction and augury?
 
 Soul: we must place at the crest of the world of beings, this
 other Principle, not merely the Soul of the Universe but, included
 in it, the Soul of the individual: this, no mean Principle, is
 needed to be the bond of union in the total of things, not, itself,
 a thing sprung like things from life-seeds, but a first-hand Cause,
 bodiless and therefore supreme over itself, free, beyond the reach
 of kosmic Cause: for, brought into body, it would not be
 unrestrictedly sovereign; it would hold rank in a series.
 
 Now the environment into which this independent principle
 enters, when it comes to this midpoint, will be largely led by
 secondary causes [or, by chance-causes]: there will therefore be a
 compromise; the action of the Soul will be in part guided by this
 environment while in other matters it will be sovereign, leading the
 way where it will. The nobler Soul will have the greater power; the
 poorer Soul, the lesser. A soul which defers to the bodily 
 temperament
 cannot escape desire and rage and is abject in poverty, 
 overbearing in
 wealth, arbitrary in power. The soul of nobler nature holds good
 against its surroundings; it is more apt to change them than to be
 changed, so that often it improves the environment and, where it
 must make concession, at least keeps its innocence.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. We admit, then, a Necessity in all that is brought about by
 this compromise between evil and accidental circumstance: what room
 was there for anything else than the thing that is? Given all the
 causes, all must happen beyond aye or nay- that is, all the external
 and whatever may be due to the sidereal circuit- therefore when the
 Soul has been modified by outer forces and acts under that 
 pressure so
 that what it does is no more than an unreflecting acceptance of
 stimulus, neither the act nor the state can be described as 
 voluntary:
 so, too, when even from within itself, it falls at times below its
 best and ignores the true, the highest, laws of action.
 
 But when our Soul holds to its Reason-Principle, to the guide,
 pure and detached and native to itself, only then can we speak of
 personal operation, of voluntary act. Things so done may truly be
 described as our doing, for they have no other source; they are the
 issue of the unmingled Soul, a Principle that is a First, a leader,
 a sovereign not subject to the errors of ignorance, not to be
 overthrown by the tyranny of the desires which, where they can break
 in, drive and drag, so as to allow of no act of ours, but mere
 answer to stimulus.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. To sum the results of our argument: All things and events
 are foreshown and brought into being by causes; but the causation is
 of two Kinds; there are results originating from the Soul and
 results due to other causes, those of the environment.
 
 In the action of our Souls all that is done of their own 
 motion in
 the light of sound reason is the Soul's work, while what is 
 done where
 they are hindered from their own action is not so much done as
 suffered. Unwisdom, then, is not due to the Soul, and, in general-
 if we mean by Fate a compulsion outside ourselves- an act is fated
 when it is contrary to wisdom.
 
 But all our best is of our own doing: such is our nature as long
 as we remain detached. The wise and good do perform acts; their
 right action is the expression of their own power: in the others it
 comes in the breathing spaces when the passions are in abeyance; but
 it is not that they draw this occasional wisdom from outside
 themselves; simply, they are for the time being unhindered.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SECOND TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON PROVIDENCE (1).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. To make the existence and coherent structure of this Universe
 depend upon automatic activity and upon chance is against all good
 sense.
 
 Such a notion could be entertained only where there is neither
 intelligence nor even ordinary perception; and reason enough has
 been urged against it, though none is really necessary.
 
 But there is still the question as to the process by which the
 individual things of this sphere have come into being, how they were
 made.
 
 Some of them seem so undesirable as to cast doubts upon a
 Universal Providence; and we find, on the one hand, the denial of
 any controlling power, on the other the belief that the Kosmos is
 the work of an evil creator.
 
 This matter must be examined through and through from the very
 first principles. We may, however, omit for the present any
 consideration of the particular providence, that beforehand decision
 which accomplishes or holds things in abeyance to some good purpose
 and gives or withholds in our own regard: when we have 
 established the
 Universal Providence which we affirm, we can link the secondary with
 it.
 
 Of course the belief that after a certain lapse of time a Kosmos
 previously non-existent came into being would imply a 
 foreseeing and a
 reasoned plan on the part of God providing for the production of the
 Universe and securing all possible perfection in it- a guidance and
 partial providence, therefore, such as is indicated. But 
 since we hold
 the eternal existence of the Universe, the utter absence of a
 beginning to it, we are forced, in sound and sequent reasoning, to
 explain the providence ruling in the Universe as a universal
 consonance with the divine Intelligence to which the Kosmos is
 subsequent not in time but in the fact of derivation, in the 
 fact that
 the Divine Intelligence, preceding it in Kind, is its cause as being
 the Archetype and Model which it merely images, the primal by which,
 from all eternity, it has its existence and subsistence.
 
 The relationship may be presented thus:
 
 The authentic and primal Kosmos is the Being of the Intellectual
 Principle and of the Veritable Existent. This contains within itself
 no spatial distinction, and has none of the feebleness of division,
 and even its parts bring no incompleteness to it since here the
 individual is not severed from the entire. In this Nature inheres
 all life and all intellect, a life living and having intellection as
 one act within a unity: every part that it gives forth is a 
 whole; all
 its content is its very own, for there is here no separation of
 thing from thing, no part standing in isolated existence estranged
 from the rest, and therefore nowhere is there any wronging of any
 other, any opposition. Everywhere one and complete, it is at rest
 throughout and shows difference at no point; it does not 
 make over any
 of its content into any new form; there can be no reason for
 changing what is everywhere perfect.
 
 Why should Reason elaborate yet another Reason, or Intelligence
 another Intelligence? An indwelling power of making things is in the
 character of a being not at all points as it should be but making,
 moving, by reason of some failure in quality. Those whose nature is
 all blessedness have no more to do than to repose in 
 themselves and be
 their being.
 
 A widespread activity is dangerous to those who must go out from
 themselves to act. But such is the blessedness of this Being that in
 its very non-action it magnificently operates and in its 
 self-dwelling
 it produces mightily.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. By derivation from that Authentic Kosmos, one within itself,
 there subsists this lower kosmos, no longer a true unity.
 
 It is multiple, divided into various elements, thing standing
 apart from thing in a new estrangement. No longer is there concord
 unbroken; hostility, too, has entered as the result of difference
 and distance; imperfection has inevitably introduced discord; for a
 part is not self-sufficient, it must pursue something outside itself
 for its fulfillment, and so it becomes the enemy to what it needs.
 
 This Kosmos of parts has come into being not as the result of a
 judgement establishing its desirability, but by the sheer 
 necessity of
 a secondary Kind.
 
 The Intellectual Realm was not of a nature to be the ultimate of
 existents. It was the First and it held great power, all there is of
 power; this means that it is productive without seeking to produce;
 for if effort and search were incumbent upon it, the Act would not
 be its own, would not spring from its essential nature; it would be,
 like a craftsman, producing by a power not inherent but acquired,
 mastered by dint of study.
 
 The Intellectual Principle, then, in its unperturbed serenity
 has brought the universe into being, by communicating from its own
 store to Matter: and this gift is the Reason-Form flowing 
 from it. For
 the Emanation of the Intellectual Principle is Reason, an emanation
 unfailing as long as the Intellectual Principle continues to have
 place among beings.
 
 The Reason-Principle within a seed contains all the parts and
 qualities concentrated in identity; there is no distinction, no
 jarring, no internal hindering; then there comes a pushing out into
 bulk, part rises in distinction with part, and at once the members
 of the organism stand in each other's way and begin to wear 
 each other
 down.
 
 So from this, the One Intellectual Principle, and the
 Reason-Form emanating from it, our Universe rises and develops part,
 and inevitably are formed groups concordant and helpful in contrast
 with groups discordant and combative; sometimes of choice and
 sometimes incidentally, the parts maltreat each other; engendering
 proceeds by destruction.
 
 Yet: Amid all that they effect and accept, the divine Realm
 imposes the one harmonious act; each utters its own voice, but all
 is brought into accord, into an ordered system, for the universal
 purpose, by the ruling Reason-Principle. This Universe is not
 Intelligence and Reason, like the Supernal, but participant in
 Intelligence and Reason: it stands in need of the harmonizing
 because it is the meeting ground of Necessity and divine
 Reason-Necessity pulling towards the lower, towards the 
 unreason which
 is its own characteristic, while yet the Intellectual Principle
 remains sovereign over it.
 
 The Intellectual Sphere [the Divine] alone is Reason, and there
 can never be another Sphere that is Reason and nothing else; so
 that, given some other system, it cannot be as noble as that 
 first; it
 cannot be Reason: yet since such a system cannot be merely Matter,
 which is the utterly unordered, it must be a mixed thing. Its two
 extremes are Matter and the Divine Reason; its governing principle
 is Soul, presiding over the conjunction of the two, and to be
 thought of not as labouring in the task but as administering
 serenely by little more than an act of presence.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Nor would it be sound to condemn this Kosmos as less than
 beautiful, as less than the noblest possible in the corporeal; and
 neither can any charge be laid against its source.
 
 The world, we must reflect, is a product of Necessity, not of
 deliberate purpose: it is due to a higher Kind engendering in its
 own likeness by a natural process. And none the less, a second
 consideration, if a considered plan brought it into being it would
 still be no disgrace to its maker- for it stands a stately whole,
 complete within itself, serving at once its own purpose and that of
 all its parts which, leading and lesser alike, are of such a 
 nature as
 to further the interests of the total. It is, therefore, 
 impossible to
 condemn the whole on the merits of the parts which, besides, must be
 judged only as they enter harmoniously or not into the 
 whole, the main
 consideration, quite overpassing the members which thus cease to
 have importance. To linger about the parts is to condemn not the
 Kosmos but some isolated appendage of it; in the entire living Being
 we fasten our eyes on a hair or a toe neglecting the marvellous
 spectacle of the complete Man; we ignore all the tribes and kinds of
 animals except for the meanest; we pass over an entire race, 
 humanity,
 and bring forward- Thersites.
 
 No: this thing that has come into Being is the Kosmos 
 complete: do
 but survey it, and surely this is the pleading you will hear:
 
 
 I am made by a God: from that God I came perfect above all forms
 of life, adequate to my function, self-sufficing, lacking 
 nothing: for
 I am the container of all, that is, of every plant and every animal,
 of all the Kinds of created things, and many Gods and nations of
 Spirit-Beings and lofty souls and men happy in their goodness.
 
 And do not think that, while earth is ornate with all its
 growths and with living things of every race, and while the very sea
 has answered to the power of Soul, do not think that the 
 great air and
 the ether and the far-spread heavens remain void of it: there it is
 that all good Souls dwell, infusing life into the stars and into
 that orderly eternal circuit of the heavens which in its conscious
 movement ever about the one Centre, seeking nothing beyond, is a
 faithful copy of the divine Mind. And all that is within me strives
 towards the Good; and each, to the measure of its faculty, attains.
 For from that Good all the heavens depend, with all my own Soul and
 the Gods that dwell in my every part, and all that lives and grows,
 and even all in me that you may judge inanimate.
 
 
 But there are degrees of participation: here no more than
 Existence, elsewhere Life; and, in Life, sometimes mainly that of
 Sensation, higher again that of Reason, finally Life in all its
 fullness. We have no right to demand equal powers in the unequal:
 the finger is not to be asked to see; there is the eye for that; a
 finger has its own business- to be finger and have finger power.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. That water extinguishes fire and fire consumes other things
 should not astonish us. The thing destroyed derived its being from
 outside itself: this is no case of a self-originating substance
 being annihilated by an external; it rose on the ruin of something
 else, and thus in its own ruin it suffers nothing strange; and for
 every fire quenched, another is kindled.
 
 In the immaterial heaven every member is unchangeably itself for
 ever; in the heavens of our universe, while the whole has life
 eternally and so too all the nobler and lordlier components, 
 the Souls
 pass from body to body entering into varied forms- and, when 
 it may, a
 Soul will rise outside of the realm of birth and dwell with the one
 Soul of all. For the embodied lives by virtue of a Form or Idea:
 individual or partial things exist by virtue of Universals; 
 from these
 priors they derive their life and maintenance, for life here is a
 thing of change; only in that prior realm is it unmoving. From that
 unchangingness, change had to emerge, and from that self-cloistered
 Life its derivative, this which breathes and stirs, the 
 respiration of
 the still life of the divine.
 
 The conflict and destruction that reign among living beings are
 inevitable, since things here are derived, brought into existence
 because the Divine Reason which contains all of them in the upper
 Heavens- how could they come here unless they were There?- must
 outflow over the whole extent of Matter.
 
 Similarly, the very wronging of man by man may be derived from
 an effort towards the Good; foiled, in their weakness, of their true
 desire, they turn against each other: still, when they do wrong,
 they pay the penalty- that of having hurt their Souls by their evil
 conduct and of degradation to a lower place- for nothing can ever
 escape what stands decreed in the law of the Universe.
 
 This is not to accept the idea, sometimes urged, that order is
 an outcome of disorder and law of lawlessness, as if evil were a
 necessary preliminary to their existence or their manifestation: on
 the contrary order is the original and enters this sphere as imposed
 from without: it is because order, law and reason exist that 
 there can
 be disorder; breach of law and unreason exist because Reason exists-
 not that these better things are directly the causes of the bad but
 simply that what ought to absorb the Best is prevented by its own
 nature, or by some accident, or by foreign interference. An entity
 which must look outside itself for a law, may be foiled of 
 its purpose
 by either an internal or an external cause; there will be 
 some flaw in
 its own nature, or it will be hurt by some alien influence, for
 often harm follows, unintended, upon the action of others in the
 pursuit of quite unrelated aims. Such living beings, on the other
 hand, as have freedom of motion under their own will sometimes take
 the right turn, sometimes the wrong.
 
 Why the wrong course is followed is scarcely worth enquiring: a
 slight deviation at the beginning develops with every advance into a
 continuously wider and graver error- especially since there is the
 attached body with its inevitable concomitant of desire- and 
 the first
 step, the hasty movement not previously considered and not 
 immediately
 corrected, ends by establishing a set habit where there was at first
 only a fall.
 
 Punishment naturally follows: there is no injustice in a man
 suffering what belongs to the condition in which he is; nor 
 can we ask
 to be happy when our actions have not earned us happiness; the good,
 only, are happy; divine beings are happy only because they are good.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. Now, once Happiness is possible at all to Souls in this
 Universe, if some fail of it, the blame must fall not upon the place
 but upon the feebleness insufficient to the staunch combat in the
 one arena where the rewards of excellence are offered. Men are not
 born divine; what wonder that they do not enjoy a divine life. And
 poverty and sickness mean nothing to the good- only to the evil are
 they disastrous- and where there is body there must be ill health.
 
 Besides, these accidents are not without their service in the
 co-ordination and completion of the Universal system.
 
 One thing perishes, and the Kosmic Reason- whose control nothing
 anywhere eludes- employs that ending to the beginning of something
 new; and, so, when the body suffers and the Soul, under the
 affliction, loses power, all that has been bound under illness and
 evil is brought into a new set of relations, into another class or
 order. Some of these troubles are helpful to the very sufferers-
 poverty and sickness, for example- and as for vice, even this brings
 something to the general service: it acts as a lesson in right
 doing, and, in many ways even, produces good; thus, by setting men
 face to face with the ways and consequences of iniquity, it 
 calls them
 from lethargy, stirs the deeper mind and sets the understanding to
 work; by the contrast of the evil under which wrong-doers labour it
 displays the worth of the right. Not that evil exists for this
 purpose; but, as we have indicated, once the wrong has come 
 to be, the
 Reason of the Kosmos employs it to good ends; and, precisely, the
 proof of the mightiest power is to be able to use the ignoble nobly
 and, given formlessness, to make it the material of unknown forms.
 
 The principle is that evil by definition is a falling short in
 good, and good cannot be at full strength in this Sphere where it is
 lodged in the alien: the good here is in something else, in
 something distinct from the Good, and this something else
 constitutes the falling short for it is not good. And this 
 is why evil
 is ineradicable: there is, first, the fact that in relation to this
 principle of Good, thing will always stand less than thing, and,
 besides, all things come into being through it and are what they are
 by standing away from it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. As for the disregard of desert- the good afflicted, the
 unworthy thriving- it is a sound explanation no doubt that 
 to the good
 nothing is evil and to the evil nothing can be good: still the
 question remains why should what essentially offends our nature fall
 to the good while the wicked enjoy all it demands? How can such an
 allotment be approved?
 
 No doubt since pleasant conditions add nothing to true happiness
 and the unpleasant do not lessen the evil in the wicked, the
 conditions matter little: as well complain that a good man happens
 to be ugly and a bad man handsome.
 
 Still, under such a dispensation, there would surely be a
 propriety, a reasonableness, a regard to merit which, as things are,
 do not appear, though this would certainly be in keeping with the
 noblest Providence: even though external conditions do not affect a
 man's hold upon good or evil, none the less it would seem utterly
 unfitting that the bad should be the masters, be sovereign in the
 state, while honourable men are slaves: a wicked ruler may commit
 the most lawless acts; and in war the worst men have a free hand and
 perpetrate every kind of crime against their prisoners.
 
 We are forced to ask how such things can be, under a Providence.
 Certainly a maker must consider his work as a whole, but 
 none the less
 he should see to the due ordering of all the parts, especially when
 these parts have Soul, that is, are Living and Reasoning Beings: the
 Providence must reach to all the details; its functioning 
 must consist
 in neglecting no point.
 
 Holding, therefore, as we do, despite all, that the Universe
 lies under an Intellectual Principle whose power has touched every
 existent, we cannot be absolved from the attempt to show in what way
 the detail of this sphere is just.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. A preliminary observation: in looking for excellence in this
 thing of mixture, the Kosmos, we cannot require all that is 
 implied in
 the excellence of the unmingled; it is folly to ask for Firsts in
 the Secondary, and since this Universe contains body, we must allow
 for some bodily influence upon the total and be thankful if the
 mingled existent lack nothing of what its nature allowed it 
 to receive
 from the Divine Reason.
 
 Thus, supposing we were enquiring for the finest type of 
 the human
 being as known here, we would certainly not demand that he prove
 identical with Man as in the Divine Intellect; we would think it
 enough in the Creator to have so brought this thing of flesh 
 and nerve
 and bone under Reason as to give grace to these corporeal 
 elements and
 to have made it possible for Reason to have contact with Matter.
 
 Our progress towards the object of our investigation must begin
 from this principle of gradation which will open to us the wonder of
 the Providence and of the power by which our universe holds 
 its being.
 
 We begin with evil acts entirely dependent upon the Souls which
 perpetrate them- the harm, for example, which perverted Souls do to
 the good and to each other. Unless the foreplanning power alone is
 to be charged with the vice in such Souls, we have no ground of
 accusation, no claim to redress: the blame lies on the Soul 
 exercising
 its choice. Even a Soul, we have seen, must have its individual
 movement; it is not abstract Spirit; the first step towards animal
 life has been taken and the conduct will naturally be in keeping
 with that character.
 
 It is not because the world existed that Souls are here: before
 the world was, they had it in them to be of the world, to concern
 themselves with it, to presuppose it, to administer it: it was in
 their nature to produce it- by whatever method, whether by giving
 forth some emanation while they themselves remained above, or by an
 actual descent, or in both ways together, some presiding from above,
 others descending; some for we are not at the moment concerned about
 the mode of creation but are simply urging that, however the 
 world was
 produced, no blame falls on Providence for what exists within it.
 
 There remains the other phase of the question- the 
 distribution of
 evil to the opposite classes of men: the good go bare while 
 the wicked
 are rich: all that human need demands, the least deserving have in
 abundance; it is they that rule; peoples and states are at their
 disposal. Would not all this imply that the divine power does not
 reach to earth?
 
 That it does is sufficiently established by the fact that Reason
 rules in the lower things: animals and plants have their share in
 Reason, Soul and Life.
 
 Perhaps, then, it reaches to earth but is not master over all?
 
 We answer that the universe is one living organism: as well
 maintain that while human head and face are the work of nature and
 of the ruling reason-principle, the rest of the frame is due to
 other agencies- accident or sheer necessity- and owes its
 inferiority to this origin, or to the incompetence of unaided
 Nature. And even granting that those less noble members are not in
 themselves admirable it would still be neither pious nor 
 even reverent
 to censure the entire structure.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. Thus we come to our enquiry as to the degree of excellence
 found in things of this Sphere, and how far they belong to an
 ordered system or in what degree they are, at least, not evil.
 
 Now in every living being the upper parts- head, face- are the
 most beautiful, the mid and lower members inferior. In the Universe
 the middle and lower members are human beings; above them, 
 the Heavens
 and the Gods that dwell there; these Gods with the entire circling
 expanse of the heavens constitute the greater part of the Kosmos:
 the earth is but a central point, and may be considered as simply
 one among the stars. Yet human wrong-doing is made a matter 
 of wonder;
 we are evidently asked to take humanity as the choice member of the
 Universe, nothing wiser existent!
 
 But humanity, in reality, is poised midway between gods and
 beasts, and inclines now to the one order, now to the other; some
 men grow like to the divine, others to the brute, the greater number
 stand neutral. But those that are corrupted to the point of
 approximating to irrational animals and wild beasts pull the
 mid-folk about and inflict wrong upon them; the victims are no doubt
 better than the wrongdoers, but are at the mercy of their 
 inferiors in
 the field in which they themselves are inferior, where, that is,
 they cannot be classed among the good since they have not trained
 themselves in self-defence.
 
 A gang of lads, morally neglected, and in that respect 
 inferior to
 the intermediate class, but in good physical training, attack and
 throw another set, trained neither physically nor morally, and make
 off with their food and their dainty clothes. What more is called
 for than a laugh?
 
 And surely even the lawgiver would be right in allowing 
 the second
 group to suffer this treatment, the penalty of their sloth and
 self-indulgence: the gymnasium lies there before them, and they, in
 laziness and luxury and listlessness, have allowed themselves to
 fall like fat-loaded sheep, a prey to the wolves.
 
 But the evil-doers also have their punishment: first they pay in
 that very wolfishness, in the disaster to their human quality: and
 next there is laid up for them the due of their Kind: living 
 ill here,
 they will not get off by death; on every precedent through all the
 line there waits its sequent, reasonable and natural- worse to the
 bad, better to the good.
 
 This at once brings us outside the gymnasium with its fun for
 boys; they must grow up, both kinds, amid their childishness and
 both one day stand girt and armed. Then there is a finer spectacle
 than is ever seen by those that train in the ring. But at this stage
 some have not armed themselves- and the duly armed win the day.
 
 Not even a God would have the right to deal a blow for the
 unwarlike: the law decrees that to come safe out of battle is for
 fighting men, not for those that pray. The harvest comes home not
 for praying but for tilling; healthy days are not for those that
 neglect their health: we have no right to complain of the ignoble
 getting the richer harvest if they are the only workers in 
 the fields,
 or the best.
 
 Again: it is childish, while we carry on all the affairs of our
 life to our own taste and not as the Gods would have us, to expect
 them to keep all well for us in spite of a life that is lived
 without regard to the conditions which the Gods have prescribed for
 our well-being. Yet death would be better for us than to go on
 living lives condemned by the laws of the Universe. If 
 things took the
 contrary course, if all the modes of folly and wickedness brought no
 trouble in life- then indeed we might complain of the indifference
 of a Providence leaving the victory to evil.
 
 Bad men rule by the feebleness of the ruled: and this is 
 just; the
 triumph of weaklings would not be just.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. It would not be just, because Providence cannot be a
 something reducing us to nothingness: to think of Providence as
 everything, with no other thing in existence, is to annihilate the
 Universe; such a providence could have no field of action; nothing
 would exist except the Divine. As things are, the Divine, of course,
 exists, but has reached forth to something other- not to reduce that
 to nothingness but to preside over it; thus in the case of Man, for
 instance, the Divine presides as the Providence, preserving the
 character of human nature, that is the character of a being under
 the providential law, which, again, implies subjection to what that
 law may enjoin.
 
 And that law enjoins that those who have made themselves good
 shall know the best of life, here and later, the bad the reverse.
 But the law does not warrant the wicked in expecting that their
 prayers should bring others to sacrifice themselves for their sakes;
 or that the gods should lay aside the divine life in order to direct
 their daily concerns; or that good men, who have chosen a path
 nobler than all earthly rule, should become their rulers. 
 The perverse
 have never made a single effort to bring the good into authority,
 nor do they take any steps to improve themselves; they are all spite
 against anyone that becomes good of his own motion, though 
 if good men
 were placed in authority the total of goodness would be increased.
 
 In sum: Man has come into existence, a living being but not a
 member of the noblest order; he occupies by choice an intermediate
 rank; still, in that place in which he exists, Providence does not
 allow him to be reduced to nothing; on the contrary he is ever being
 led upwards by all those varied devices which the Divine employs in
 its labour to increase the dominance of moral value. The human race,
 therefore, is not deprived by Providence of its rational being; it
 retains its share, though necessarily limited, in wisdom,
 intelligence, executive power and right doing, the right doing, at
 least, of individuals to each other- and even in wronging others
 people think they are doing right and only paying what is due.
 
 Man is, therefore, a noble creation, as perfect as the scheme
 allows; a part, no doubt, in the fabric of the All, he yet 
 holds a lot
 higher than that of all the other living things of earth.
 
 Now, no one of any intelligence complains of these others, man's
 inferiors, which serve to the adornment of the world; it would be
 feeble indeed to complain of animals biting man, as if we 
 were to pass
 our days asleep. No: the animal, too, exists of necessity, and is
 serviceable in many ways, some obvious and many progressively
 discovered- so that not one lives without profit to itself 
 and even to
 humanity. It is ridiculous, also, to complain that many of them are
 dangerous- there are dangerous men abroad as well- and if they
 distrust us, and in their distrust attack, is that anything to
 wonder at?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. But: if the evil in men is involuntary, if their own will
 has not made them what they are, how can we either blame wrong-doers
 or even reproach their victims with suffering through their 
 own fault?
 
 If there is a Necessity, bringing about human wickedness 
 either by
 force of the celestial movement or by a rigorous sequence set up by
 the First Cause, is not the evil a thin rooted in Nature? And if
 thus the Reason-Principle of the universe is the creator of evil,
 surely all is injustice?
 
 No: Men are no doubt involuntary sinners in the sense 
 that they do
 not actually desire to sin; but this does not alter the fact that
 wrongdoers, of their own choice, are, themselves, the agents; it is
 because they themselves act that the sin is in their own; if 
 they were
 not agents they could not sin.
 
 The Necessity [held to underlie human wickedness] is not an
 outer force [actually compelling the individual], but exists only in
 the sense of a universal relationship.
 
 Nor is the force of the celestial Movement such as to leave us
 powerless: if the universe were something outside and apart 
 from us it
 would stand as its makers willed so that, once the gods had 
 done their
 part, no man, however impious, could introduce anything contrary to
 their intention. But, as things are, efficient act does come 
 from men:
 given the starting Principle, the secondary line, no doubt, is
 inevitably completed; but each and every principle 
 contributes towards
 the sequence. Now Men are Principles, or, at least, they are moved
 by their characteristic nature towards all that is good, and that
 nature is a Principle, a freely acting cause.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. Are we, then, to conclude that particular things are
 determined by Necessities rooted in Nature and by the sequence of
 causes, and that everything is as good as anything can be?
 
 No: the Reason-Principle is the sovereign, making all: it wills
 things as they are and, in its reasonable act, it produces even what
 we know as evil: it cannot desire all to be good: an artist would
 not make an animal all eyes; and in the same way, the 
 Reason-Principle
 would not make all divine; it makes Gods but also celestial spirits,
 the intermediate order, then men, then the animals; all is graded
 succession, and this in no spirit of grudging but in the 
 expression of
 a Reason teeming with intellectual variety.
 
 We are like people ignorant of painting who complain that the
 colours are not beautiful everywhere in the picture: but the Artist
 has laid on the appropriate tint to every spot. Or we are censuring
 a drama because the persons are not all heroes but include a servant
 and a rustic and some scurrilous clown; yet take away the low
 characters and the power of the drama is gone; these are part and
 parcel of it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. Suppose this Universe were the direct creation of the
 Reason-Principle applying itself, quite unchanged, to Matter,
 retaining, that is, the hostility to partition which it derives from
 its Prior, the Intellectual Principle- then, this its product, so
 produced, would be of supreme and unparalleled excellence. But the
 Reason-Principle could not be a thing of entire identity or even of
 closely compact diversity; and the mode in which it is here 
 manifested
 is no matter of censure since its function is to be all things, each
 single thing in some distinctive way.
 
 But has it not, besides itself entering Matter, brought other
 beings down? Has it not for example brought Souls into Matter and,
 in adapting them to its creation, twisted them against their own
 nature and been the ruin of many of them? And can this be right?
 
 The answer is that the Souls are, in a fair sense, 
 members of this
 Reason-Principle and that it has not adapted them to the creation by
 perverting them, but has set them in the place here to which their
 quality entitles them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. And we must not despise the familiar observation 
 that there is
 something more to be considered than the present. There are the
 periods of the past and, again, those in the future; and these have
 everything to do with fixing worth of place.
 
 Thus a man, once a ruler, will be made a slave because he abused
 his power and because the fall is to his future good. Those that
 have money will be made poor- and to the good poverty is no 
 hindrance.
 Those that have unjustly killed, are killed in turn, unjustly as
 regards the murderer but justly as regards the victim, and those
 that are to suffer are thrown into the path of those that administer
 the merited treatment.
 
 It is not an accident that makes a man a slave; no one is a
 prisoner by chance; every bodily outrage has its due cause. The man
 once did what he now suffers. A man that murders his mother will
 become a woman and be murdered by a son; a man that wrongs a woman
 will become a woman, to be wronged.
 
 Hence arises that awesome word "Adrasteia" [the Inevadable
 Retribution]; for in very truth this ordinance is an Adrasteia,
 justice itself and a wonderful wisdom.
 
 We cannot but recognize from what we observe in this 
 universe that
 some such principle of order prevails throughout the entire of
 existence- the minutest of things a tributary to the vast total; the
 marvellous art shown not merely in the mightiest works and sublimest
 members of the All, but even amid such littleness as one would think
 Providence must disdain: the varied workmanship of wonder in any and
 every animal form; the world of vegetation, too; the grace of fruits
 and even of leaves, the lavishness, the delicacy, the diversity of
 exquisite bloom; and all this not issuing once, and then to die out,
 but made ever and ever anew as the Transcendent Beings move
 variously over this earth.
 
 In all the changing, there is no change by chance: there is no
 taking of new forms but to desirable ends and in ways worthy 
 of Divine
 Powers. All that is Divine executes the Act of its quality; its
 quality is the expression of its essential Being: and this essential
 Being in the Divine is the Being whose activities produce as 
 one thing
 the desirable and the just- for if the good and the just are not
 produced there, where, then, have they their being?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. The ordinance of the Kosmos, then, is in keeping with the
 Intellectual Principle. True, no reasoning went to its creation, but
 it so stands that the keenest reasoning must wonder- since no
 reasoning could be able to make it otherwise- at the spectacle
 before it, a product which, even in the Kinds of the partial and
 particular Sphere, displays the Divine Intelligence to a degree in
 which no arranging by reason could express it. Every one of the
 ceaselessly recurrent types of being manifests a creating
 Reason-Principle above all censure. No fault is to be found unless
 on the assumption that everything ought to come into being with all
 the perfection of those that have never known such a coming, the
 Eternals. In that case, things of the Intellectual realm and 
 things of
 the realm of sense must remain one unbroken identity for ever.
 
 In this demand for more good than exists, there is implied a
 failure to recognize that the form allotted to each entity is
 sufficient in itself; it is like complaining because one kind of
 animal lacks horns. We ought to understand both that the
 Reason-Principle must extend to every possible existent and, at the
 same time, that every greater must include lesser things, that to
 every whole belong its parts, and that all cannot be equality unless
 all part is to be absent.
 
 This is why in the Over-World each entity is all, while here,
 below, the single thing is not all [is not the Universe but 
 a "Self"].
 Thus too, a man, an individual, in so far as he is a part, is not
 Humanity complete: but wheresoever there is associated with the
 parts something that is no part [but a Divine, an 
 Intellectual Being],
 this makes a whole of that in which it dwells. Man, man as partial
 thing, cannot be required to have attained to the very summit of
 goodness: if he had, he would have ceased to be of the partial
 order. Not that there is any grudging in the whole towards the part
 that grows in goodness and dignity; such an increase in value is a
 gain to the beauty of the whole; the lesser grows by being made over
 in the likeness of the greater, by being admitted, as it were, to
 something of that greatness, by sharing in that rank, and thus even
 from this place of man, from man's own self, something gleams forth,
 as the stars shine in the divine firmament, so that all appears one
 great and lovely figure- living or wrought in the furnaces of
 craftsmanship- with stars radiant not only in the ears and 
 on the brow
 but on the breasts too, and wherever else they may be displayed in
 beauty.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. These considerations apply very well to things considered as
 standing alone: but there is a stumbling-block, a new 
 problem, when we
 think of all these forms, permanent and ceaselessly produced, in
 mutual relationship.
 
 The animals devour each other: men attack each other: all is war
 without rest, without truce: this gives new force to the question
 how Reason can be author of the plan and how all can be declared
 well done.
 
 This new difficulty is not met by the former answer; that all
 stands as well as the nature of things allows; that the blame for
 their condition falls on Matter dragging them down; that, given the
 plan as we know it, evil cannot be eliminated and should not be;
 that the Matter making its presence felt is still not supreme but
 remains an element taken in from outside to contribute to a definite
 total, or rather to be itself brought to order by Reason.
 
 The Divine Reason is the beginning and the end; all that comes
 into being must be rational and fall at its coming into an ordered
 scheme reasonable at every point. Where, then, is the necessity of
 this bandit war of man and beast?
 
 This devouring of Kind by Kind is necessary as the means to the
 transmutation of living things which could not keep form for 
 ever even
 though no other killed them: what grievance is it that when they
 must go their despatch is so planned as to be serviceable to others?
 
 Still more, what does it matter when they are devoured only to
 return in some new form? It comes to no more than the murder 
 of one of
 the personages in a play; the actor alters his make-up and 
 enters in a
 new role. The actor, of course, was not really killed; but 
 if dying is
 but changing a body as the actor changes a costume, or even an exit
 from the body like the exit of the actor from the boards when he has
 no more to say or do, what is there so very dreadful in this
 transformation of living beings one into another?
 
 Surely it is much better so than if they had never existed: that
 way would mean the bleak quenching of life, precluded from passing
 outside itself; as the plan holds, life is poured copiously 
 throughout
 a Universe, engendering the universal things and weaving variety
 into their being, never at rest from producing an endless sequence
 of comeliness and shapeliness, a living pastime.
 
 Men directing their weapons against each other- under doom of
 death yet neatly lined up to fight as in the pyrrhic sword-dances of
 their sport- this is enough to tell us that all human intentions are
 but play, that death is nothing terrible, that to die in a 
 war or in a
 fight is but to taste a little beforehand what old age has in store,
 to go away earlier and come back the sooner. So for misfortunes that
 may accompany life, the loss of property, for instance; the 
 loser will
 see that there was a time when it was not his, that its possession
 is but a mock boon to the robbers, who will in their turn lose it to
 others, and even that to retain property is a greater loss than to
 forfeit it.
 
 Murders, death in all its guises, the reduction and sacking of
 cities, all must be to us just such a spectacle as the 
 changing scenes
 of a play; all is but the varied incident of a plot, costume on and
 off, acted grief and lament. For on earth, in all the succession of
 life, it is not the Soul within but the Shadow outside of the
 authentic man, that grieves and complains and acts out the plot on
 this world stage which men have dotted with stages of their own
 constructing. All this is the doing of man knowing no more than to
 live the lower and outer life, and never perceiving that, in his
 weeping and in his graver doings alike, he is but at play; to handle
 austere matters austerely is reserved for the thoughtful: the other
 kind of man is himself a futility. Those incapable of 
 thinking gravely
 read gravity into frivolities which correspond to their own
 frivolous Nature. Anyone that joins in their trifling and so comes
 to look on life with their eyes must understand that by lending
 himself to such idleness he has laid aside his own character. If
 Socrates himself takes part in the trifling, he trifles in the outer
 Socrates.
 
 We must remember, too, that we cannot take tears and laments as
 proof that anything is wrong; children cry and whimper where there
 is nothing amiss.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. But if all this is true, what room is left for evil? 
 Where are
 we to place wrong-doing and sin?
 
 How explain that in a world organized in good, the efficient
 agents [human beings] behave unjustly, commit sin? And how comes
 misery if neither sin nor injustice exists?
 
 Again, if all our action is determined by a natural process, how
 can the distinction be maintained between behaviour in 
 accordance with
 nature and behaviour in conflict with it?
 
 And what becomes of blasphemy against the divine? The blasphemer
 is made what he is: a dramatist has written a part insulting and
 maligning himself and given it to an actor to play.
 
 These considerations oblige us to state the Logos [the
 Reason-Principle of the Universe] once again, and more 
 clearly, and to
 justify its nature.
 
 This Reason-Principle, then- let us dare the definition in the
 hope of conveying the truth- this Logos is not the Intellectual
 Principle unmingled, not the Absolute Divine Intellect; nor does it
 descend from the pure Soul alone; it is a dependent of that Soul
 while, in a sense, it is a radiation from both those divine
 Hypostases; the Intellectual Principle and the Soul- the Soul as
 conditioned by the Intellectual Principle engender this 
 Logos which is
 a Life holding restfully a certain measure of Reason.
 
 Now all life, even the least valuable, is an activity, and not a
 blind activity like that of flame; even where there is not sensation
 the activity of life is no mere haphazard play of Movement: 
 any object
 in which life is present, and object which participates in 
 Life, is at
 once enreasoned in the sense that the activity peculiar to life is
 formative, shaping as it moves.
 
 Life, then, aims at pattern as does the pantomimic 
 dancer with his
 set movements; the mime, in himself, represents life, and, besides,
 his movements proceed in obedience to a pattern designed to
 symbolize life.
 
 Thus far to give us some idea of the nature of Life in general.
 
 But this Reason-Principle which emanates from the complete
 unity, divine Mind, and the complete unity Life [= Soul]- is 
 neither a
 uniate complete Life nor a uniate complete divine Mind, nor does it
 give itself whole and all-including to its subject. [By an imperfect
 communication] it sets up a conflict of part against part: 
 it produces
 imperfect things and so engenders and maintains war and attack, and
 thus its unity can be that only of a sum-total not of a thing
 undivided. At war with itself in the parts which it now exhibits, it
 has the unity, or harmony, of a drama torn with struggle. The drama,
 of course, brings the conflicting elements to one final harmony,
 weaving the entire story of the clashing characters into one thing;
 while in the Logos the conflict of the divergent elements 
 rises within
 the one element, the Reason-Principle: the comparison therefore is
 rather with a harmony emerging directly from the conflicting
 elements themselves, and the question becomes what 
 introduces clashing
 elements among these Reason-Principles.
 
 Now in the case of music, tones high and low are the product of
 Reason-Principles which, by the fact that they are Principles of
 harmony, meet in the unit of Harmony, the absolute Harmony, a more
 comprehensive Principle, greater than they and including them as its
 parts. Similarly in the Universe at large we find contraries- white
 and black, hot and cold, winged and wingless, footed and footless,
 reasoning and unreasoning- but all these elements are members of one
 living body, their sum-total; the Universe is a 
 self-accordant entity,
 its members everywhere clashing but the total being the
 manifestation of a Reason-Principle. That one Reason-Principle,
 then, must be the unification of conflicting Reason-Principles whose
 very opposition is the support of its coherence and, almost, of its
 Being.
 
 And indeed, if it were not multiple, it could not be a Universal
 Principle, it could not even be at all a Reason-Principle; 
 in the fact
 of its being a Reason-Principle is contained the fact of interior
 difference. Now the maximum of difference is contrariety; admitting
 that this differentiation exists and creates, it will create
 difference in the greatest and not in the least degree; in other
 words, the Reason-Principle, bringing about differentiation to the
 uttermost degree, will of necessity create contrarieties: it will be
 complete only by producing itself not in merely diverse things but
 in contrary things.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. The nature of the Reason-Principle is adequately expressed
 in its Act and, therefore, the wider its extension the 
 nearer will its
 productions approach to full contrariety: hence the world of sense
 is less a unity than is its Reason-Principle; it contains a wider
 multiplicity and contrariety: its partial members will, therefore,
 be urged by a closer intention towards fullness of life, a warmer
 desire for unification.
 
 But desire often destroys the desired; it seeks its own 
 good, and,
 if the desired object is perishable, the ruin follows: and 
 the partial
 thing straining towards its completing principle draws towards
 itself all it possibly can.
 
 Thus, with the good we have the bad: we have the opposed 
 movements
 of a dancer guided by one artistic plan; we recognize in his 
 steps the
 good as against the bad, and see that in the opposition lies 
 the merit
 of the design.
 
 But, thus, the wicked disappear?
 
 No: their wickedness remains; simply, their role is not of their
 own planning.
 
 But, surely, this excuses them?
 
 No; excuse lies with the Reason-Principle- and the
 Reason-Principle does not excuse them.
 
 No doubt all are members of this Principle but one is a good
 man, another is bad- the larger class, this- and it goes as 
 in a play;
 the poet while he gives each actor a part is also using them as they
 are in their own persons: he does not himself rank the men as
 leading actor, second, third; he simply gives suitable words to
 each, and by that assignment fixes each man's standing.
 
 Thus, every man has his place, a place that fits the good man, a
 place that fits the bad: each within the two orders of them makes
 his way, naturally, reasonably, to the place, good or bad, that
 suits him, and takes the position he has made his own. There he
 talks and acts, in blasphemy and crime or in all goodness: for the
 actors bring to this play what they were before it was ever staged.
 
 In the dramas of human art, the poet provides the words but the
 actors add their own quality, good or bad- for they have more to do
 than merely repeat the author's words- in the truer drama which
 dramatic genius imitates in its degree, the Soul displays itself in
 a part assigned by the creator of the piece.
 
 As the actors of our stages get their masks and their costume,
 robes of state or rags, so a Soul is allotted its fortunes, 
 and not at
 haphazard but always under a Reason: it adapts itself to the
 fortunes assigned to it, attunes itself, ranges itself rightly to
 the drama, to the whole Principle of the piece: then it 
 speaks out its
 business, exhibiting at the same time all that a Soul can express of
 its own quality, as a singer in a song. A voice, a bearing,
 naturally fine or vulgar, may increase the charm of a piece; on the
 other hand, an actor with his ugly voice may make a sorry exhibition
 of himself, yet the drama stands as good a work as ever: the
 dramatist, taking the action which a sound criticism suggests,
 disgraces one, taking his part from him, with perfect 
 justice: another
 man he promotes to more serious roles or to any more 
 important play he
 may have, while the first is cast for whatever minor work there may
 be.
 
 Just so the Soul, entering this drama of the Universe, making
 itself a part of the Play, bringing to its acting its personal
 excellence or defect, set in a definite place at the entry and
 accepting from the author its entire role- superimposed upon its own
 character and conduct- just so, it receives in the end its
 punishment and reward.
 
 But these actors, Souls, hold a peculiar dignity: they act in a
 vaster place than any stage: the Author has made them masters of all
 this world; they have a wide choice of place; they themselves
 determine the honour or discredit in which they are agents 
 since their
 place and part are in keeping with their quality: they therefore fit
 into the Reason-Principle of the Universe, each adjusted, most
 legitimately, to the appropriate environment, as every string of the
 lyre is set in the precisely right position, determined by the
 Principle directing musical utterance, for the due production of the
 tones within its capacity. All is just and good in the Universe in
 which every actor is set in his own quite appropriate place, 
 though it
 be to utter in the Darkness and in Tartarus the dreadful sounds
 whose utterance there is well.
 
 This Universe is good not when the individual is a 
 stone, but when
 everyone throws in his own voice towards a total harmony, singing
 out a life- thin, harsh, imperfect, though it be. The Syrinx does
 not utter merely one pure note; there is a thin obscure sound which
 blends in to make the harmony of Syrinx music: the harmony is made
 up from tones of various grades, all the tones differing, but the
 resultant of all forming one sound.
 
 Similarly the Reason-Principle entire is One, but it is broken
 into unequal parts: hence the difference of place found in the
 Universe, better spots and worse; and hence the inequality of Souls,
 finding their appropriate surroundings amid this local 
 inequality. The
 diverse places of this sphere, the Souls of unequal grade and unlike
 conduct, are wen exemplified by the distinction of parts in 
 the Syrinx
 or any other instrument: there is local difference, but from every
 position every string gives forth its own tone, the sound 
 appropriate,
 at once, to its particular place and to the entire plan.
 
 What is evil in the single Soul will stand a good thing in the
 universal system; what in the unit offends nature will serve 
 nature in
 the total event- and still remains the weak and wrong tone it is,
 though its sounding takes nothing from the worth of the whole, just
 as, in another order of image, the executioner's ugly office does
 not mar the well-governed state: such an officer is a civic 
 necessity;
 and the corresponding moral type is often serviceable; thus, even as
 things are, all is well.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. Souls vary in worth; and the difference is due, among other
 causes, to an almost initial inequality; it is in reason that,
 standing to the Reason-Principle, as parts, they should be unequal
 by the fact of becoming separate.
 
 We must also remember that every Soul has its second 
 grade and its
 third, and that, therefore, its expression may take any one of three
 main forms. But this point must be dealt with here again: the matter
 requires all possible elucidation.
 
 We may perhaps think of actors having the right to add something
 to the poet's words: the drama as it stands is not perfectly filled
 in, and they are to supply where the Author has left blank 
 spaces here
 and there; the actors are to be something else as well; they become
 parts of the poet, who on his side has a foreknowledge of the word
 they will add, and so is able to bind into one story what the actors
 bring in and what is to follow.
 
 For, in the All, the sequences, including what follows upon
 wickedness, become Reason-Principles, and therefore in right reason.
 Thus: from adultery and the violation of prisoners the process of
 nature will produce fine children, to grow, perhaps, into fine men;
 and where wicked violence has destroyed cities, other and nobler
 cities may rise in their place.
 
 But does not this make it absurd to introduce Souls as 
 responsible
 causes, some acting for good and some for evil? If we thus exonerate
 the Reason-Principle from any part in wickedness do we not 
 also cancel
 its credit for the good? Why not simply take the doings of these
 actors for representative parts of the Reason-Principle as the
 doings of stage-actors are representative parts of the stage-drama?
 Why not admit that the Reason-Principle itself includes evil 
 action as
 much as good action, and inspires the precise conduct of all its
 representatives? Would not this be all the more Plausible in that
 the universal drama is the completer creation and that the
 Reason-Principle is the source of all that exists?
 
 But this raises the question: "What motive could lead 
 the Logos to
 produce evil?"
 
 The explanation, also, would take away all power in the Universe
 from Souls, even those nearest to the divine; they would all be mere
 parts of a Reason-Principle.
 
 And, further- unless all Reason-Principles are Souls- why should
 some be souls and others exclusively Reason-Principles when 
 the All is
 itself a Soul?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THIRD TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON PROVIDENCE (2).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. What is our answer?
 
 All events and things, good and evil alike, are included 
 under the
 Universal Reason-Principle of which they are parts- strictly
 "included" for this Universal Idea does not engender them but
 encompasses them.
 
 The Reason-Principles are acts or expressions of a 
 Universal Soul;
 its parts [i.e., events good and evil] are expressions of these
 Soulparts.
 
 This unity, Soul, has different parts; the Reason-Principles,
 correspondingly, will also have their parts, and so, too, will the
 ultimates of the system, all that they bring into being.
 
 The Souls are in harmony with each other and so, too, are their
 acts and effects; but it is harmony in the sense of a resultant
 unity built out of contraries. All things, as they rise from a
 unity, come back to unity by a sheer need of nature; differences
 unfold themselves, contraries are produced, but all is drawn into
 one organized system by the unity at the source.
 
 The principle may be illustrated from the different classes of
 animal life: there is one genus, horse, though horses among 
 themselves
 fight and bite and show malice and angry envy: so all the others
 within the unity of their Kind; and so humanity.
 
 All these types, again, can be ranged under the one Kind, that
 of living things; objects without life can be thought of under their
 specific types and then be resumed under the one Kind of the
 "non-living"; if we choose to go further yet, living and non-living
 may be included under the one Kind, "Beings," and, further still,
 under the Source of Being.
 
 Having attached all to this source, we turn to move down again
 in continuous division: we see the Unity fissuring, as it reaches
 out into Universality, and yet embracing all in one system so that
 with all its differentiation it is one multiple living thing- an
 organism in which each member executes the function of its own
 nature while it still has its being in that One Whole; fire burns;
 horse does horse work; men give, each the appropriate act of the
 peculiar personal quality- and upon the several particular Kinds to
 which each belongs follow the acts, and the good or evil of the life.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Circumstances are not sovereign over the good of 
 life, for they
 are themselves moulded by their priors and come in as members of a
 sequence. The Leading-Principle holds all the threads while the
 minor agents, the individuals, serve according to their own
 capacities, as in a war the generalissimo lays down the plan and his
 subordinates do their best to its furtherance. The Universe has been
 ordered by a Providence that may be compared to a general; he has
 considered operations, conditions and such practical needs 
 as food and
 drink, arms and engines of war; all the problem of reconciling these
 complex elements has been worked out beforehand so as to make it
 probable that the final event may be success. The entire scheme
 emerges from the general's mind with a certain plausible promise,
 though it cannot cover the enemy's operations, and there is no power
 over the disposition of the enemy's forces: but where the mighty
 general is in question whose power extends over all that is, what
 can pass unordered, what can fail to fit into the plan?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. For, even though the I is sovereign in choosing, yet by the
 fact of the choice the thing done takes its place in the ordered
 total. Your personality does not come from outside into the
 universal scheme; you are a part of it, you and your personal
 disposition.
 
 But what is the cause of this initial personality?
 
 This question resolves itself into two: are we to make the
 Creator, if Creator there is, the cause of the moral quality of the
 individual or does the responsibility lie with the creature?
 
 Or is there, perhaps, no responsibility? After all, none is
 charged in the case of plants brought into being without the
 perceptive faculties; no one is blamed because animals are not all
 that men are- which would be like complaining that men are not all
 that gods are. Reason acquits plant and animal and, their maker; how
 can it complain because men do not stand above humanity?
 
 If the reproach simply means that Man might improve by bringing
 from his own stock something towards his betterment we must 
 allow that
 the man failing in this is answerable for his own inferiority: but
 if the betterment must come not from within the man but from
 without, from his Author, it is folly to ask more than has 
 been given,
 as foolish in the case of man as in plant and animal.
 
 The question is not whether a thing is inferior to something
 else but whether in its own Kind it suffices to its own part;
 universal equality there cannot be.
 
 Then the Reason-Principle has measured things out with the set
 purpose of inequality?
 
 Certainly not: the inequality is inevitable by the nature of
 things: the Reason-Principle of this Universe follows upon a phase
 of the Soul; the Soul itself follows upon an Intellectual Principle,
 and this Intellectual Principle is not one among the things of the
 Universe but is all things; in all things, there is implied 
 variety of
 things; where there is variety and not identity there must 
 be primals,
 secondaries, tertiaries and every grade downward. Forms of 
 life, then,
 there must be that are not pure Soul but the dwindling of Souls
 enfeebled stage by stage of the process. There is, of course, a Soul
 in the Reason-Principle constituting a living being, but it 
 is another
 Soul [a lesser phase], not that [the Supreme Soul] from which the
 Reason-Principle itself derives; and this combined vehicle of life
 weakens as it proceeds towards matter, and what it engenders is
 still more deficient. Consider how far the engendered stands from
 its origin and yet, what a marvel!
 
 In sum nothing can secure to a thing of process the 
 quality of the
 prior order, loftier than all that is product and amenable to no
 charge in regard to it: the wonder is, only, that it reaches 
 and gives
 to the lower at all, and that the traces of its presence should be
 so noble. And if its outgiving is greater than the lower can
 appropriate, the debt is the heavier; all the blame must 
 fall upon the
 unreceptive creature, and Providence be the more exalted.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. If man were all of one piece- I mean, if he were nothing more
 than a made thing, acting and acted upon according to a fixed
 nature- he could be no more subject to reproach and punishment than
 the mere animals. But as the scheme holds, man is singled out for
 condemnation when he does evil; and this with justice. For he is no
 mere thing made to rigid plan; his nature contains a Principle apart
 and free.
 
 This does not, however, stand outside of Providence or of the
 Reason of the All; the Over-World cannot be dependent upon the World
 of Sense. The higher shines down upon the lower, and this 
 illumination
 is Providence in its highest aspect: The Reason-Principle has two
 phases, one which creates the things of process and another which
 links them with the higher beings: these higher beings constitute
 the over-providence on which depends that lower providence which is
 the secondary Reason-Principle inseparably united with its 
 primal: the
 two- the Major and Minor Providence- acting together produce the
 universal woof, the one all-comprehensive Providence.
 
 Men possess, then, a distinctive Principle: but not all men turn
 to account all that is in their Nature; there are men that 
 live by one
 Principle and men that live by another or, rather, by several
 others, the least noble. For all these Principles are present even
 when not acting upon the man- though we cannot think of them as
 lying idle; everything performs its function.
 
 "But," it will be said, "what reason can there be for their not
 acting upon the man once they are present; inaction must mean
 absence?"
 
 We maintain their presence always, nothing void of them.
 
 But surely not where they exercise no action? If they
 necessarily reside in all men, surely they must be operative in all-
 this Principle of free action, especially.
 
 First of all, this free Principle is not an absolute 
 possession of
 the animal Kinds and is not even an absolute possession to all men.
 
 So this Principle is not the only effective force in all men?
 
 There is no reason why it should not be. There are men in whom
 it alone acts, giving its character to the life while all else is
 but Necessity [and therefore outside of blame].
 
 For [in the case of an evil life] whether it is that the
 constitution of the man is such as to drive him down the troubled
 paths or whether [the fault is mental or spiritual in that] the
 desires have gained control, we are compelled to attribute the guilt
 to the substratum [something inferior to the highest principle in
 Man]. We would be naturally inclined to say that this substratum
 [the responsible source of evil] must be Matter and not, as our
 argument implies, the Reason-Principle; it would appear that not the
 Reason-Principle but Matter were the dominant, crude Matter at the
 extreme and then Matter as shaped in the realized man: but we must
 remember that to this free Principle in man [which is a phase of the
 All Soul] the Substratum [the direct inferior to be moulded] is [not
 Matter but] the Reason-Principle itself with whatever that produces
 and moulds to its own form, so that neither crude Matter nor Matter
 organized in our human total is sovereign within us.
 
 The quality now manifested may be probably referred to 
 the conduct
 of a former life; we may suppose that previous actions have made the
 Reason-Principle now governing within us inferior in radiance to
 that which ruled before; the Soul which later will shine out again
 is for the present at a feebler power.
 
 And any Reason-Principle may be said to include within itself
 the Reason-Principle of Matter which therefore it is able to 
 elaborate
 to its own purposes, either finding it consonant with itself or
 bestowing upon it the quality which makes it so. The
 Reason-Principle of an ox does not occur except in 
 connection with the
 Matter appropriate to the ox-Kind. It must be by such a process that
 the transmigration, of which we read takes place; the Soul must lose
 its nature, the Reason-Principle be transformed; thus there comes
 the ox-soul which once was Man.
 
 The degradation, then, is just.
 
 Still, how did the inferior Principle ever come into being, and
 how does the higher fall to it?
 
 Once more- not all things are Firsts; there are Secondaries and
 Tertiaries, of a nature inferior to that of their Priors; 
 and a slight
 tilt is enough to determine the departure from the straight course.
 Further, the linking of any one being with any other amounts to a
 blending such as to produce a distinct entity, a compound of the
 two; it is not that the greater and prior suffers any diminution of
 its own nature; the lesser and secondary is such from its very
 beginning; it is in its own nature the lesser thing it 
 becomes, and if
 it suffers the consequences, such suffering is merited: all our
 reasonings on these questions must take account of previous living
 as the source from which the present takes its rise.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. There is, then a Providence, which permeates the Kosmos from
 first to last, not everywhere equal, as in a numerical distribution,
 but proportioned, differing, according to the grades of 
 place- just as
 in some one animal, linked from first to last, each member 
 has its own
 function, the nobler organ the higher activity while others
 successively concern the lower degrees of the life, each part acting
 of itself, and experiencing what belongs to its own nature and what
 comes from its relation with every other. Strike, and what 
 is designed
 for utterance gives forth the appropriate volume of sound while
 other parts take the blow in silence but react in their own especial
 movement; the total of all the utterance and action and receptivity
 constitutes what we may call the personal voice, life and history of
 the living form. The parts, distinct in Kind, have distinct 
 functions:
 the feet have their work and the eyes theirs; the 
 understanding serves
 to one end, the Intellectual Principle to another.
 
 But all sums to a unity, a comprehensive Providence. From the
 inferior grade downwards is Fate: the upper is Providence alone: for
 in the Intellectual Kosmos all is Reason-Principle or its
 Priors-Divine Mind and unmingled Soul-and immediately upon these
 follows Providence which rises from Divine Mind, is the 
 content of the
 Unmingled Soul, and, through this Soul, is communicated to the
 Sphere of living things.
 
 This Reason-Principle comes as a thing of unequal parts, and
 therefore its creations are unequal, as, for example, the several
 members of one Living Being. But after this allotment of rank and
 function, all act consonant with the will of the gods keeps the
 sequence and is included under the providential government, for the
 Reason-Principle of providence is god-serving.
 
 All such right-doing, then, is linked to Providence; but 
 it is not
 therefore performed by it: men or other agents, living or lifeless,
 are causes of certain things happening, and any good that may result
 is taken up again by Providence. In the total, then, the right rules
 and what has happened amiss is transformed and corrected. Thus, to
 take an example from a single body, the Providence of a living
 organism implies its health; let it be gashed or otherwise wounded,
 and that Reason-Principle which governs it sets to work to draw it
 together, knit it anew, heal it, and put the affected part to rights.
 
 In sum, evil belongs to the sequence of things, but it comes
 from necessity. It originates in ourselves; it has its causes no
 doubt, but we are not, therefore, forced to it by Providence: some
 of these causes we adapt to the operation of Providence and of its
 subordinates, but with others we fail to make the connection; the
 act instead of being ranged under the will of Providence consults
 the desire of the agent alone or of some other element in the
 Universe, something which is either itself at variance with 
 Providence
 or has set up some such state of variance in ourselves.
 
 The one circumstance does not produce the same result wherever
 it acts; the normal operation will be modified from case to case:
 Helen's beauty told very differently on Paris and on Idomeneus;
 bring together two handsome people of loose character and two living
 honourably and the resulting conduct is very different; a good man
 meeting a libertine exhibits a distinct phase of his nature and,
 similarly, the dissolute answer to the society of their betters.
 
 The act of the libertine is not done by Providence or in
 accordance with Providence; neither is the action of the good done
 by Providence- it is done by the man- but it is done in accordance
 with Providence, for it is an act consonant with the 
 Reason-Principle.
 Thus a patient following his treatment is himself an agent and yet
 is acting in accordance with the doctor's method inspired by the art
 concerned with the causes of health and sickness: what one does
 against the laws of health is one's act, but an act conflicting with
 the Providence of medicine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. But, if all this be true, how can evil fall within 
 the scope of
 seership? The predictions of the seers are based on 
 observation of the
 Universal Circuit: how can this indicate the evil with the good?
 
 Clearly the reason is that all contraries coalesce. Take, for
 example, Shape and Matter: the living being [of the lower order] is
 a coalescence of these two; so that to be aware of the Shape and the
 Reason-Principle is to be aware of the Matter on which the Shape has
 been imposed.
 
 The living-being of the compound order is not present 
 [as pure and
 simple Idea] like the living being of the Intellectual order: in the
 compound entity, we are aware, at once, of the 
 Reason-Principle and of
 the inferior element brought under form. Now the Universe is such a
 compound living thing: to observe, therefore, its content is to be
 aware not less of its lower elements than of the Providence which
 operates within it.
 
 This Providence reaches to all that comes into being; its scope
 therefore includes living things with their actions and states, the
 total of their history at once overruled by the Reason-Principle and
 yet subject in some degree to Necessity.
 
 These, then, are presented as mingled both by their 
 initial nature
 and by the continuous process of their existence; and the Seer is
 not able to make a perfect discrimination setting on the one side
 Providence with all that happens under Providence and on the other
 side what the substrate communicates to its product. Such
 discrimination is not for a man, not for a wise man or a divine man:
 one may say it is the prerogative of a god. Not causes but facts lie
 in the Seer's province; his art is the reading of the scriptures of
 Nature which tell of the ordered and never condescend to the
 disorderly; the movement of the Universe utters its testimony to him
 and, before men and things reveal themselves, brings to light what
 severally and collectively they are.
 
 Here conspires with There and There with Here, elaborating
 together the consistency and eternity of a Kosmos and by their
 correspondences revealing the sequence of things to the trained
 observer- for every form of divination turns upon correspondences.
 Universal interdependence, there could not be, but universal
 resemblance there must. This probably is the meaning of the saying
 that Correspondences maintain the Universe.
 
 This is a correspondence of inferior with inferior, of superior
 with superior, eye with eye, foot with foot, everything with its
 fellow and, in another order, virtue with right action and vice with
 unrighteousness. Admit such correspondence in the All and we have
 the possibility of prediction. If the one order acts on the 
 other, the
 relation is not that of maker to thing made- the two are 
 coeval- it is
 the interplay of members of one living being; each in its own place
 and way moves as its own nature demands; to every organ its grade
 and task, and to every grade and task its effective organ.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. And since the higher exists, there must be the lower as well.
 The Universe is a thing of variety, and how could there be 
 an inferior
 without a superior or a superior without an inferior? We cannot
 complain about the lower in the higher; rather, we must be 
 grateful to
 the higher for giving something of itself to the lower.
 
 In a word, those that would like evil driven out from the All
 would drive out Providence itself.
 
 What would Providence have to provide for? Certainly not for
 itself or for the Good: when we speak of a Providence above, we mean
 an act upon something below.
 
 That which resumes all under a unity is a Principle in which all
 things exist together and the single thing is All. From this
 Principle, which remains internally unmoved, particular things push
 forth as from a single root which never itself emerges. They are a
 branching into part, into multiplicity, each single outgrowth
 bearing its trace of the common source. Thus, phase by 
 phase, there in
 finally the production into this world; some things close 
 still to the
 root, others widely separate in the continuous progression until we
 have, in our metaphor, bough and crest, foliage and fruit. At the
 one side all is one point of unbroken rest, on the other is the
 ceaseless process, leaf and fruit, all the things of process
 carrying ever within themselves the Reason-Principles of the Upper
 Sphere, and striving to become trees in their own minor order and
 producing, if at all, only what is in strict gradation from
 themselves.
 
 As for the abandoned spaces in what corresponds to the branches
 these two draw upon the root, from which, despite all their
 variance, they also derive; and the branches again operate upon
 their own furthest extremities: operation is to be traced only from
 point to next point, but, in the fact, there has been both inflow
 and outgo [of creative or modifying force] at the very root which,
 itself again, has its priors.
 
 The things that act upon each other are branchings from a
 far-off beginning and so stand distinct; but they derive initially
 from the one source: all interaction is like that of brothers,
 resemblant as drawing life from the same parents.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FOURTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 OUR TUTELARY SPIRIT.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Some Existents [Absolute Unity and Intellectual-Principle]
 remain at rest while their Hypostases, or Expressed-Idea, come into
 being; but, in our view, the Soul generates by its motion, 
 to which is
 due the sensitive faculty- that in any of its 
 expression-forms- Nature
 and all forms of life down to the vegetable order. Even as it is
 present in human beings the Soul carries its Expression-form
 [Hypostasis] with it, but is not the dominant since it is not the
 whole man (humanity including the Intellectual Principal, as 
 well): in
 the vegetable order it is the highest since there is nothing to
 rival it; but at this phase it is no longer reproductive, or, at
 least, what it produces is of quite another order; here life ceases;
 all later production is lifeless.
 
 What does this imply?
 
 Everything the Soul engenders down to this point comes into
 being shapeless, and takes form by orientation towards its author
 and supporter: therefore the thing engendered on the further side
 can be no image of the Soul, since it is not even alive; it 
 must be an
 utter Indetermination. No doubt even in things of the nearer order
 there was indetermination, but within a form; they were undetermined
 not utterly but only in contrast with their perfect state: at this
 extreme point we have the utter lack of determination. Let it be
 raised to its highest degree and it becomes body by taking such
 shape as serves its scope; then it becomes the recipient of 
 its author
 and sustainer: this presence in body is the only example of the
 boundaries of Higher Existents running into the boundary of 
 the Lower.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. It is of this Soul especially that we read "All Soul has care
 for the Soulless"- though the several Souls thus care in their own
 degree and way. The passage continues- "Soul passes through 
 the entire
 heavens in forms varying with the variety of place"- the sensitive
 form, the reasoning form, even the vegetative form- and this means
 that in each "place" the phase of the soul there dominant carries
 out its own ends while the rest, not present there, is idle.
 
 Now, in humanity the lower is not supreme; it is an 
 accompaniment;
 but neither does the better rule unfailingly; the lower element also
 has a footing, and Man, therefore, lives in part under sensation,
 for he has the organs of sensation, and in large part even by the
 merely vegetative principle, for the body grows and propagates: all
 the graded phases are in a collaboration, but the entire form, man,
 takes rank by the dominant, and when the life-principle leaves the
 body it is what it is, what it most intensely lived.
 
 This is why we must break away towards the High: we dare not
 keep ourselves set towards the sensuous principle, following the
 images of sense, or towards the merely vegetative, intent upon the
 gratifications of eating and procreation; our life must be pointed
 towards the Intellective, towards the Intellectual-Principle,
 towards God.
 
 Those that have maintained the human level are men once more.
 Those that have lived wholly to sense become animals- 
 corresponding in
 species to the particular temper of the life- ferocious animals
 where the sensuality has been accompanied by a certain measure of
 spirit, gluttonous and lascivious animals where all has been
 appetite and satiation of appetite. Those who in their pleasures
 have not even lived by sensation, but have gone their way in a
 torpid grossness become mere growing things, for this lethargy is
 the entire act of the vegetative, and such men have been busy
 be-treeing themselves. Those, we read, that, otherwise untainted,
 have loved song become vocal animals; kings ruling unreasonably but
 with no other vice are eagles; futile and flighty visionaries ever
 soaring skyward, become highflying birds; observance of civic and
 secular virtue makes man again, or where the merit is less 
 marked, one
 of the animals of communal tendency, a bee or the like.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. What, then, is the spirit [guiding the present life and
 determining the future]?
 
 The Spirit of here and now.
 
 And the God?
 
 The God of here and now.
 
 Spirit, God; This in act within us, conducts every life; 
 for, even
 here and now, it is the dominant of our Nature.
 
 That is to say that the dominant is the spirit which takes
 possession of the human being at birth?
 
 No: the dominant is the Prior of the individual spirit; it
 presides inoperative while its secondary acts: so that if the acting
 force is that of men of the sense-life, the tutelary spirit is the
 Rational Being, while if we live by that Rational Being, our
 tutelary Spirit is the still higher Being, not directly operative
 but assenting to the working principle. The words "You shall
 yourselves choose" are true, then; for by our life we elect our own
 loftier.
 
 But how does this spirit come to be the determinant of our fate?
 
 It is not when the life is ended that it conducts us here or
 there; it operates during the lifetime; when we cease to live, our
 death hands over to another principle this energy of our own
 personal career.
 
 That principle [of the new birth] strives to gain control, and
 if it succeeds it also lives and itself, in turn, possesses a
 guiding spirit [its next higher]: if on the contrary it is weighed
 down by the developed evil in the character, the spirit of the
 previous life pays the penalty: the evil-liver loses grade because
 during his life the active principle of his being took the tilt
 towards the brute by force of affinity. If, on the contrary, the Man
 is able to follow the leading of his higher Spirit, he 
 rises: he lives
 that Spirit; that noblest part of himself to which he is being led
 becomes sovereign in his life; this made his own, he works for the
 next above until he has attained the height.
 
 For the Soul is many things, is all, is the Above and the
 Beneath to the totality of life: and each of us is an Intellectual
 Kosmos, linked to this world by what is lowest in us, but, by what
 is the highest, to the Divine Intellect: by all that is intellective
 we are permanently in that higher realm, but at the fringe of the
 Intellectual we are fettered to the lower; it is as if we gave forth
 from it some emanation towards that lower, or, rather some Act,
 which however leaves our diviner part not in itself diminished.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. But is this lower extremity of our intellective phase
 fettered to body for ever?
 
 No: if we turn, this turns by the same act.
 
 And the Soul of the All- are we to think that when it turns from
 this sphere its lower phase similarly withdraws?
 
 No: for it never accompanied that lower phase of itself; it
 never knew any coming, and therefore never came down; it remains
 unmoved above, and the material frame of the Universe draws close to
 it, and, as it were, takes light from it, no hindrance to it, in no
 way troubling it, simply lying unmoved before it.
 
 But has the Universe, then, no sensation? "It has no Sight," we
 read, since it has no eyes, and obviously it has not ears, nostrils,
 or tongue. Then has it perhaps such a consciousness as we have of
 our own inner conditions?
 
 No: where all is the working out of one nature, there is nothing
 but still rest; there is not even enjoyment. Sensibility is 
 present as
 the quality of growth is, unrecognized. But the Nature of the World
 will be found treated elsewhere; what stands here is all that the
 question of the moment demands.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. But if the presiding Spirit and the conditions of life are
 chosen by the Soul in the overworld, how can anything be left to
 our independent action here?
 
 The answer is that very choice in the over-world is merely an
 allegorical statement of the Soul's tendency and temperament, a
 total character which it must express wherever it operates.
 
 But if the tendency of the Soul is the master-force and, in the
 Soul, the dominant is that phase which has been brought to 
 the fore by
 a previous history, then the body stands acquitted of any bad
 influence upon it? The Soul's quality exists before any bodily life;
 it has exactly what it chose to have; and, we read, it never changes
 its chosen spirit; therefore neither the good man nor the bad is the
 product of this life?
 
 Is the solution, perhaps, that man is potentially both good and
 bad but becomes the one or the other by force of act?
 
 But what if a man temperamentally good happens to enter a
 disordered body, or if a perfect body falls to a man naturally
 vicious?
 
 The answer is that the Soul, to whichever side it 
 inclines, has in
 some varying degree the power of working the forms of body 
 over to its
 own temper, since outlying and accidental circumstances cannot
 overrule the entire decision of a Soul. Where we read that, after
 the casting of lots, the sample lives are exhibited with the casual
 circumstances attending them and that the choice is made upon
 vision, in accordance with the individual temperament, we 
 are given to
 understand that the real determination lies with the Souls, who
 adapt the allotted conditions to their own particular quality.
 
 The Timaeus indicates the relation of this guiding spirit to
 ourselves: it is not entirely outside of ourselves; is not bound up
 with our nature; is not the agent in our action; it belongs to us as
 belonging to our Soul, but not in so far as we are particular human
 beings living a life to which it is superior: take the 
 passage in this
 sense and it is consistent; understand this Spirit otherwise 
 and there
 is contradiction. And the description of the Spirit, 
 moreover, as "the
 power which consummates the chosen life," is, also, in agreement
 with this interpretation; for while its presidency saves us from
 falling much deeper into evil, the only direct agent within 
 us is some
 thing neither above it nor equal to it but under it: Man cannot
 cease to be characteristically Man.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. What, then, is the achieved Sage?
 
 One whose Act is determined by the higher phase of the Soul.
 
 It does not suffice to perfect virtue to have only this Spirit
 [equivalent in all men] as cooperator in the life: the 
 acting force in
 the Sage is the Intellective Principle [the diviner phase of 
 the human
 Soul] which therefore is itself his presiding spirit or is 
 guided by a
 presiding spirit of its own, no other than the very Divinity.
 
 But this exalts the Sage above the Intellectual Principle as
 possessing for presiding spirit the Prior to the Intellectual
 Principle: how then does it come about that he was not, from the
 very beginning, all that he now is?
 
 The failure is due to the disturbance caused by birth- though,
 before all reasoning, there exists the instinctive movement reaching
 out towards its own.
 
 On instinct which the Sage finally rectifies in every respect?
 
 Not in every respect: the Soul is so constituted that its
 life-history and its general tendency will answer not merely to its
 own nature but also to the conditions among which it acts.
 
 The presiding Spirit, as we read, conducting a Soul to the
 Underworld ceases to be its guardian- except when the Soul 
 resumes [in
 its later choice] the former state of life.
 
 But, meanwhile, what happens to it?
 
 From the passage [in the Phaedo] which tells how it presents the
 Soul to judgement we gather that after the death it resumes the form
 it had before the birth, but that then, beginning again, it 
 is present
 to the Souls in their punishment during the period of their renewed
 life- a time not so much of living as of expiation.
 
 But the Souls that enter into brute bodies, are they 
 controlled by
 some thing less than this presiding Spirit? No: theirs is still a
 Spirit, but an evil or a foolish one.
 
 And the Souls that attain to the highest?
 
 Of these higher Souls some live in the world of Sense, some
 above it: and those in the world of Sense inhabit the Sun or another
 of the planetary bodies; the others occupy the fixed Sphere 
 [above the
 planetary] holding the place they have merited through having lived
 here the superior life of reason.
 
 We must understand that, while our Souls do contain an
 Intellectual Kosmos they also contain a subordination of 
 various forms
 like that of the Kosmic Soul. The world Soul is distributed so as to
 produce the fixed sphere and the planetary circuits corresponding to
 its graded powers: so with our Souls; they must have their provinces
 according to their different powers, parallel to those of the World
 Soul: each must give out its own special act; released, each will
 inhabit there a star consonant with the temperament and 
 faculty in act
 within and constituting the principle of the life; and this star or
 the next highest power will stand to them as God or more exactly as
 tutelary spirit.
 
 But here some further precision is needed.
 
 Emancipated Souls, for the whole period of their sojourn there
 above, have transcended the Spirit-nature and the entire fatality of
 birth and all that belongs to this visible world, for they have
 taken up with them that Hypostasis of the Soul in which the desire
 of earthly life is vested. This Hypostasis may be described as the
 distributable Soul, for it is what enters bodily forms and
 multiplies itself by this division among them. But its 
 distribution is
 not a matter of magnitudes; wherever it is present, there is the
 same thing present entire; its unity can always be 
 reconstructed: when
 living things- animal or vegetal- produce their constant 
 succession of
 new forms, they do so in virtue of the self-distribution of 
 this phase
 of the Soul, for it must be as much distributed among the 
 new forms as
 the propagating originals are. In some cases it communicates 
 its force
 by permanent presence the life principle in plants for instance- in
 other cases it withdraws after imparting its virtue- for instance
 where from the putridity of dead animal or vegetable matter a
 multitudinous birth is produced from one organism.
 
 A power corresponding to this in the All must reach down and
 co-operate in the life of our world- in fact the very same power.
 
 If the Soul returns to this Sphere it finds itself under the
 same Spirit or a new, according to the life it is to live. With this
 Spirit it embarks in the skiff of the universe: the "spindle of
 Necessity" then takes control and appoints the seat for the voyage,
 the seat of the lot in life.
 
 The Universal circuit is like a breeze, and the voyager, still
 or stirring, is carried forward by it. He has a hundred varied
 experiences, fresh sights, changing circumstances, all sorts of
 events. The vessel itself furnishes incident, tossing as it 
 drives on.
 And the voyager also acts of himself in virtue of that individuality
 which he retains because he is on the vessel in his own person and
 character. Under identical circumstances individuals answer very
 differently in their movements and acts: hence it comes 
 about that, be
 the occurrences and conditions of life similar or dissimilar, the
 result may differ from man to man, as on the other hand a similar
 result may be produced by dissimilar conditions: this 
 (personal answer
 to incident) it is that constitutes destiny.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIFTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON LOVE.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. What is Love? A God, a Celestial Spirit, a state of 
 mind? Or is
 it, perhaps, sometimes to be thought of as a God or Spirit and
 sometimes merely as an experience? And what is it essentially in
 each of these respects?
 
 These important questions make it desirable to review prevailing
 opinions on the matter, the philosophical treatment it has received
 and, especially, the theories of the great Plato who has 
 many passages
 dealing with Love, from a point of view entirely his own.
 
 Plato does not treat of it as simply a state observed in 
 Souls; he
 also makes it a Spirit-being so that we read of the birth of Eros,
 under definite circumstances and by a certain parentage.
 
 Now everyone recognizes that the emotional state for 
 which we make
 this "Love" responsible rises in souls aspiring to be knit in the
 closest union with some beautiful object, and that this aspiration
 takes two forms, that of the good whose devotion is for 
 beauty itself,
 and that other which seeks its consummation in some vile 
 act. But this
 generally admitted distinction opens a new question: we need a
 philosophical investigation into the origin of the two phases.
 
 It is sound, I think, to find the primal source of Love in a
 tendency of the Soul towards pure beauty, in a recognition, in a
 kinship, in an unreasoned consciousness of friendly 
 relation. The vile
 and ugly is in clash, at once, with Nature and with God: Nature
 produces by looking to the Good, for it looks towards Order- 
 which has
 its being in the consistent total of the good, while the unordered
 is ugly, a member of the system of evil- and besides Nature itself,
 clearly, springs from the divine realm, from Good and 
 Beauty; and when
 anything brings delight and the sense of kinship, its very image
 attracts.
 
 Reject this explanation, and no one can tell how the mental
 state rises and where are its causes: it is the explanation of even
 copulative love which is the will to beget in beauty; Nature seeks
 to produce the beautiful and therefore by all reason cannot desire
 to procreate in the ugly.
 
 Those that desire earthly procreation are satisfied with the
 beauty found on earth, the beauty of image and of body; it is
 because they are strangers to the Archetype, the source of even the
 attraction they feel towards what is lovely here. There are Souls to
 whom earthly beauty is a leading to the memory of that in the higher
 realm and these love the earthly as an image; those that have not
 attained to this memory do not understand what is happening within
 them, and take the image for the reality. Once there is perfect
 self-control, it is no fault to enjoy the beauty of earth; where
 appreciation degenerates into carnality, there is sin.
 
 Pure Love seeks the beauty alone, whether there is 
 Reminiscence or
 not; but there are those that feel, also, a desire of such 
 immortality
 as lies within mortal reach; and these are seeking Beauty in their
 demand for perpetuity, the desire of the eternal; Nature teaches
 them to sow the seed and to beget in beauty, to sow towards
 eternity, but in beauty through their own kinship with the
 beautiful. And indeed the eternal is of the one stock with the
 beautiful, the Eternal-Nature is the first shaping of beauty 
 and makes
 beautiful all that rises from it.
 
 The less the desire for procreation, the greater is the
 contentment with beauty alone, yet procreation aims at the 
 engendering
 of beauty; it is the expression of a lack; the subject is 
 conscious of
 insufficiency and, wishing to produce beauty, feels that the 
 way is to
 beget in a beautiful form. Where the procreative desire is lawless
 or against the purposes of nature, the first inspiration has been
 natural, but they have diverged from the way, they have slipped and
 fallen, and they grovel; they neither understand whither Love sought
 to lead them nor have they any instinct to production; they have not
 mastered the right use of the images of beauty; they do not know
 what the Authentic Beauty is.
 
 Those that love beauty of person without carnal desire love for
 beauty's sake; those that have- for women, of course- the copulative
 love, have the further purpose of self-perpetuation: as long as they
 are led by these motives, both are on the right path, though 
 the first
 have taken the nobler way. But, even in the right, there is the
 difference that the one set, worshipping the beauty of earth, look
 no further, while the others, those of recollection, 
 venerate also the
 beauty of the other world while they, still, have no 
 contempt for this
 in which they recognize, as it were, a last outgrowth, an
 attenuation of the higher. These, in sum, are innocent frequenters
 of beauty, not to be confused with the class to whom it becomes an
 occasion of fall into the ugly- for the aspiration towards a good
 degenerates into an evil often.
 
 So much for love, the state.
 
 Now we have to consider Love, the God.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. The existence of such a being is no demand of the 
 ordinary man,
 merely; it is supported by Theologians and, over and over again, by
 Plato to whom Eros is child of Aphrodite, minister of beautiful
 children, inciter of human souls towards the supernal beauty or
 quickener of an already existing impulse thither. All this requires
 philosophical examination. A cardinal passage is that in the 
 Symposium
 where we are told Eros was not a child of Aphrodite but born on the
 day of Aphrodite's birth, Penia, Poverty, being the mother, 
 and Poros,
 Possession, the father.
 
 The matter seems to demand some discussion of Aphrodite, since
 in any case Eros is described as being either her son or in some
 association with her. Who then is Aphrodite, and in what 
 sense is Love
 either her child or born with her or in some way both her child and
 her birth-fellow?
 
 To us Aphrodite is twofold; there is the heavenly Aphrodite,
 daughter of Ouranos or Heaven: and there is the other the daughter of
 Zeus and Dione, this is the Aphrodite who presides over earthly
 unions; the higher was not born of a mother and has no part in
 marriages for in Heaven there is no marrying.
 
 The Heavenly Aphrodite, daughter of Kronos who is no other than
 the Intellectual Principle- must be the Soul at its divinest:
 unmingled as the immediate emanation of the unmingled; remaining
 ever Above, as neither desirous nor capable of descending to this
 sphere, never having developed the downward tendency, a divine
 Hypostasis essentially aloof, so unreservedly an Authentic 
 Being as to
 have no part with Matter- and therefore mythically "the unmothered"
 justly called not Celestial Spirit but God, as knowing no admixture,
 gathered cleanly within itself.
 
 Any Nature springing directly from the Intellectual 
 Principle must
 be itself also a clean thing: it will derive a resistance of its own
 from its nearness to the Highest, for all its tendency, no less than
 its fixity, centres upon its author whose power is certainly
 sufficient to maintain it Above.
 
 Soul then could never fall from its sphere; it is closer held to
 the divine Mind than the very sun could hold the light it gives
 forth to radiate about it, an outpouring from itself held firmly to
 it, still.
 
 But following upon Kronos- or, if you will, upon Heaven, the
 father of Kronos- the Soul directs its Act towards him and holds
 closely to him and in that love brings forth the Eros through whom
 it continues to look towards him. This Act of the Soul has 
 produced an
 Hypostasis, a Real-Being; and the mother and this Hypostasis- her
 offspring, noble Love gaze together upon Divine Mind. Love, thus, is
 ever intent upon that other loveliness, and exists to be the medium
 between desire and that object of desire. It is the eye of the
 desirer; by its power what loves is enabled to see the loved thing.
 But it is first; before it becomes the vehicle of vision, it 
 is itself
 filled with the sight; it is first, therefore, and not even in the
 same order- for desire attains to vision only through the efficacy
 of Love, while Love, in its own Act, harvests the spectacle of
 beauty playing immediately above it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. That Love is a Hypostasis [a "Person"] a Real-Being 
 sprung from
 a Real-Being- lower than the parent but authentically existent- is
 beyond doubt.
 
 For the parent-Soul was a Real-Being sprung directly from the
 Act of the Hypostasis that ranks before it: it had life; it was a
 constituent in the Real-Being of all that authentically is- in the
 Real-Being which looks, rapt, towards the very Highest. That was the
 first object of its vision; it looked towards it as towards its
 good, and it rejoiced in the looking; and the quality of what it saw
 was such that the contemplation could not be void of effect; 
 in virtue
 of that rapture, of its position in regard to its object, of the
 intensity of its gaze, the Soul conceived and brought forth an
 offspring worthy of itself and of the vision. Thus; there is a
 strenuous activity of contemplation in the Soul; there is an 
 emanation
 towards it from the object contemplated; and Eros is born, the Love
 which is an eye filled with its vision, a seeing that bears its
 image with it; Eros taking its name, probably, from the fact that
 its essential being is due to this horasis, this seeing. Of course
 Love, as an emotion, will take its name from Love, the 
 Person, since a
 Real-Being cannot but be prior to what lacks this reality. The
 mental state will be designated as Love, like the Hypostasis, though
 it is no more than a particular act directed towards a particular
 object; but it must not be confused with the Absolute Love, 
 the Divine
 Being. The Eros that belongs to the supernal Soul must be of one
 temper with it; it must itself look aloft as being of the 
 household of
 that Soul, dependent upon that Soul, its very offspring; and 
 therefore
 caring for nothing but the contemplation of the Gods.
 
 Once that Soul which is the primal source of light to the
 heavens is recognized as an Hypostasis standing distinct and aloof
 it must be admitted that Love too is distinct and aloof though not,
 perhaps, so loftily celestial a being as the Soul. Our own best we
 conceive as inside ourselves and yet something apart; so, we must
 think of this Love- as essentially resident where the unmingling
 Soul inhabits.
 
 But besides this purest Soul, there must be also a Soul of the
 All: at once there is another Love- the eye with which this second
 Soul looks upwards- like the supernal Eros engendered by force of
 desire. This Aphrodite, the secondary Soul, is of this Universe- not
 Soul unmingled alone, not Soul, the Absolute, giving birth, 
 therefore,
 to the Love concerned with the universal life; no, this is the Love
 presiding over marriages; but it, also, has its touch of the upward
 desire; and, in the degree of that striving, it stirs and leads
 upwards the Souls of the young and every Soul with which it is
 incorporated in so far as there is a natural tendency to remembrance
 of the divine. For every Soul is striving towards The Good, even the
 mingling Soul and that of particular beings, for each holds directly
 from the divine Soul, and is its offspring.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. Does each individual Soul, then, contain within itself such a
 Love in essence and substantial reality?
 
 Since not only the pure All-Soul but also that of the Universe
 contain such a Love, it would be difficult to explain why 
 our personal
 Soul should not. It must be so, even, with all that has life.
 
 This indwelling love is no other than the Spirit which, as we
 are told, walks with every being, the affection dominant in each
 several nature. It implants the characteristic desire; the
 particular Soul, strained towards its own natural objects, brings
 forth its own Eros, the guiding spirit realizing its worth and the
 quality of its Being.
 
 As the All-Soul contains the Universal Love, so must the single
 Soul be allowed its own single Love: and as closely as the 
 single Soul
 holds to the All-Soul, never cut off but embraced within it, the two
 together constituting one principle of life, so the single separate
 Love holds to the All-Love. Similarly, the individual love keeps
 with the individual Soul as that other, the great Love, goes with
 the All-Soul; and the Love within the All permeates it throughout so
 that the one Love becomes many, showing itself where it 
 chooses at any
 moment of the Universe, taking definite shape in these its partial
 phases and revealing itself at its will.
 
 In the same way we must conceive many Aphrodites in the All,
 Spirits entering it together with Love, all emanating from an
 Aphrodite of the All, a train of particular Aphrodites dependent
 upon the first, and each with the particular Love in attendance:
 this multiplicity cannot be denied, if Soul be the mother of 
 Love, and
 Aphrodite mean Soul, and Love be an act of a Soul seeking good.
 
 This Love, then, leader of particular Souls to The Good, is
 twofold: the Love in the loftier Soul would be a god ever linking
 the Soul to the divine; the Love in the mingling Soul will be a
 celestial spirit.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. But what is the Nature of this Spirit- of the Supernals in
 general?
 
 The Spirit-Kind is treated in the Symposium where, with 
 much about
 the others, we learn of Eros- Love- born to Penia- Poverty- 
 and Poros-
 Possession- who is son of Metis- Resource- at Aphrodite's 
 birth feast.
 
 But to take Plato as meaning, by Eros, this Universe- and not
 simply the Love native within it- involves much that is
 self-contradictory.
 
 For one thing, the universe is described as a blissful god and
 as self-sufficing, while this "Love" is confessedly neither 
 divine nor
 self-sufficing but in ceaseless need.
 
 Again, this Kosmos is a compound of body and soul; but Aphrodite
 to Plato is the Soul itself, therefore Aphrodite would 
 necessarily- he
 a constituent part of Eros, dominant member! A man is the man's
 Soul, if the world is, similarly, the world's Soul, then Aphrodite,
 the Soul, is identical with Love, the Kosmos! And why should this
 one spirit, Love, be the Universe to the exclusion of all the
 others, which certainly are sprung from the same Essential-Being?
 Our only escape would be to make the Kosmos a complex of Supernals.
 
 Love, again, is called the Dispenser of beautiful children: does
 this apply to the Universe? Love is represented as homeless, bedless
 and barefooted: would not that be a shabby description of the Kosmos
 and quite out of the truth?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. What then, in sum, is to be thought of Love and of his
 "birth" as we are told of it?
 
 Clearly we have to establish the significance, here, of Poverty
 and Possession, and show in what way the parentage is appropriate:
 we have also to bring these two into line with the other Supernals
 since one spirit nature, one spirit essence, must characterize all
 unless they are to have merely a name in common.
 
 We must, therefore, lay down the grounds on which we distinguish
 the Gods from the Celestials- that is, when we emphasize the
 separate nature of the two orders and are not, as often in practice,
 including these Spirits under the common name of Gods.
 
 It is our teaching and conviction that the Gods are immune to
 all passion while we attribute experience and emotion to the
 Celestials which, though eternal Beings and directly next to 
 the Gods,
 are already a step towards ourselves and stand between the divine
 and the human.
 
 But by what process was the immunity lost? What in their nature
 led them downwards to the inferior?
 
 And other questions present themselves.
 
 Does the Intellectual Realm include no member of this spirit
 order, not even one? And does the Kosmos contain only these spirits,
 God being confined to the Intellectual? Or are there Gods in the
 sub-celestial too, the Kosmos itself being a God, the third, as is
 commonly said, and the Powers down to the Moon being all 
 Gods as well?
 
 It is best not to use the word "Celestial" of any Being of that
 Realm; the word "God" may be applied to the Essential-Celestial- the
 autodaimon- and even to the Visible Powers of the Universe of Sense
 down to the Moon; Gods, these too, visible, secondary, sequent upon
 the Gods of the Intellectual Realm, consonant with Them, held about
 Them, as the radiance about the star.
 
 What, then, are these spirits?
 
 A Celestial is the representative generated by each Soul when it
 enters the Kosmos.
 
 And why, by a Soul entering the Kosmos?
 
 Because Soul pure of the Kosmos generates not a Celestial Spirit
 but a God; hence it is that we have spoken of Love, offspring of
 Aphrodite the Pure Soul, as a God.
 
 But, first what prevents every one of the Celestials 
 from being an
 Eros, a Love? And why are they not untouched by Matter like the Gods?
 
 On the first question: Every Celestial born in the 
 striving of the
 Soul towards the good and beautiful is an Eros; and all the Souls
 within the Kosmos do engender this Celestial; but other 
 Spirit-Beings,
 equally born from the Soul of the All, but by other faculties of
 that Soul, have other functions: they are for the direct service of
 the All, and administer particular things to the purpose of the
 Universe entire. The Soul of the All must be adequate to all that is
 and therefore must bring into being spirit powers serviceable not
 merely in one function but to its entire charge.
 
 But what participation can the Celestials have in Matter, and in
 what Matter?
 
 Certainly none in bodily Matter; that would make them simply
 living things of the order of sense. And if, even, they are to
 invest themselves in bodies of air or of fire, the nature must have
 already been altered before they could have any contact with the
 corporeal. The Pure does not mix, unmediated, with body- though many
 think that the Celestial-Kind, of its very essence, comports a body
 aerial or of fire.
 
 But why should one order of Celestial descend to body and
 another not? The difference implies the existence of some cause or
 medium working upon such as thus descend. What would 
 constitute such a
 medium?
 
 We are forced to assume that there is a Matter of the 
 Intellectual
 Order, and that Beings partaking of it are thereby enabled to enter
 into the lower Matter, the corporeal.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. This is the significance of Plato's account of the birth of
 Love.
 
 The drunkenness of the father Poros or Possession is caused by
 Nectar, "wine yet not existing"; Love is born before the realm of
 sense has come into being: Penia had participation in the 
 Intellectual
 before the lower image of that divine Realm had appeared; 
 she dwelt in
 that Sphere, but as a mingled being consisting partly of Form but
 partly also of that indetermination which belongs to the Soul before
 she attains the Good and when all her knowledge of Reality is a
 fore-intimation veiled by the indeterminate and unordered: in this
 state Poverty brings forth the Hypostasis, Love.
 
 This, then, is a union of Reason with something that is 
 not Reason
 but a mere indeterminate striving in a being not yet illuminated:
 the offspring Love, therefore, is not perfect, not self-sufficient,
 but unfinished, bearing the signs of its parentage, the undirected
 striving and the self-sufficient Reason. This offspring is a
 Reason-Principle but not purely so; for it includes within itself an
 aspiration ill-defined, unreasoned, unlimited- it can never be sated
 as long as it contains within itself that element of the
 Indeterminate. Love, then, clings to the Soul, from which it 
 sprung as
 from the principle of its Being, but it is lessened by including an
 element of the Reason-Principle which did not remain 
 self-concentrated
 but blended with the indeterminate, not, it is true, by immediate
 contact but through its emanation. Love, therefore, is like 
 a goad; it
 is without resource in itself; even winning its end, it is 
 poor again.
 
 It cannot be satisfied because a thing of mixture never 
 can be so:
 true satisfaction is only for what has its plenitude in its 
 own being;
 where craving is due to an inborn deficiency, there may be
 satisfaction at some given moment but it does not last. Love, then,
 has on the one side the powerlessness of its native 
 inadequacy, on the
 other the resource inherited from the Reason-Kind.
 
 Such must be the nature and such the origin of the entire Spirit
 Order, each- like its fellow, Love- has its appointed sphere, is
 powerful there, and wholly devoted to it, and, like Love, 
 none is ever
 complete of itself but always straining towards some good which it
 sees in things of the partial sphere.
 
 We understand, now, why good men have no other Love other Eros
 of life- than that for the Absolute and Authentic Good, and never
 follow the random attractions known to those ranged under the lower
 Spirit Kind.
 
 Each human being is set under his own Spirit-Guides, but this is
 mere blank possession when they ignore their own and live by some
 other spirit adopted by them as more closely attuned to the
 operative part of the Soul in them. Those that go after evil are
 natures that have merged all the Love-Principles within them in the
 evil desires springing in their hearts and allowed the right reason,
 which belongs to our kind, to fall under the spell of false 
 ideas from
 another source.
 
 All the natural Loves, all that serve the ends of Nature, are
 good; in a lesser Soul, inferior in rank and in scope; in the
 greater Soul, superior; but all belong to the order of Being. Those
 forms of Love that do not serve the purposes of Nature are merely
 accidents attending on perversion: in no sense are they 
 Real-Beings or
 even manifestations of any Reality; for they are no true issue of
 Soul; they are merely accompaniments of a spiritual flaw which the
 Soul automatically exhibits in the total of disposition and conduct.
 
 In a word; all that is truly good in a Soul acting to 
 the purposes
 of nature and within its appointed order, all this is Real-Being:
 anything else is alien, no act of the Soul, but merely something
 that happens to it: a parallel may be found in false mentation,
 notions behind which there is no reality as there is in the case of
 authentic ideas, the eternal, the strictly defined, in which there
 is at once an act of true knowing, a truly knowable object and
 authentic existence- and this not merely in the Absolute, but also
 in the particular being that is occupied by the 
 authentically knowable
 and by the Intellectual-Principle manifest in every several form.
 
 In each particular human being we must admit the existence of
 the authentic Intellective Act and of the authentically knowable
 object- though not as wholly merged into our being, since we are not
 these in the absolute and not exclusively these- and hence 
 our longing
 for absolute things: it is the expression of our intellective
 activities: if we sometimes care for the partial, that affection is
 not direct but accidental, like our knowledge that a given
 triangular figure is made up of two right angles because the
 absolute triangle is so.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. But what are we to understand by this Zeus with the 
 garden into
 which, we are told, Poros or Wealth entered? And what is the garden?
 
 We have seen that the Aphrodite of the Myth is the Soul and that
 Poros, Wealth, is the Reason-Principle of the Universe: we have
 still to explain Zeus and his garden.
 
 We cannot take Zeus to be the Soul, which we have agreed is
 represented by Aphrodite.
 
 Plato, who must be our guide in this question, speaks in the
 Phaedrus of this God, Zeus, as the Great Leader- though elsewhere he
 seems to rank him as one of three- but in the Philebus he speaks
 more plainly when he says that there is in Zeus not only a 
 royal Soul,
 but also a royal Intellect.
 
 As a mighty Intellect and Soul, he must be a principle of Cause;
 he must be the highest for several reasons but especially because to
 be King and Leader is to be the chief cause: Zeus then is the
 Intellectual Principle. Aphrodite, his daughter, issue of him,
 dwelling with him, will be Soul, her very name Aphrodite [= 
 the habra,
 delicate] indicating the beauty and gleam and innocence and delicate
 grace of the Soul.
 
 And if we take the male gods to represent the Intellectual
 Powers and the female gods to be their souls- to every Intellectual
 Principle its companion Soul- we are forced, thus also, to make
 Aphrodite the Soul of Zeus; and the identification is confirmed by
 Priests and Theologians who consider Aphrodite and Hera one and the
 same and call Aphrodite's star the star of Hera.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. This Poros, Possession, then, is the Reason-Principle of all
 that exists in the Intellectual Realm and in the supreme Intellect;
 but being more diffused, kneaded out as it were, it must touch Soul,
 be in Soul, [as the next lower principle].
 
 For, all that lies gathered in the Intellect is native to it:
 nothing enters from without; but "Poros intoxicated" is some Power
 deriving satisfaction outside itself: what, then, can we 
 understand by
 this member of the Supreme filled with Nectar but a Reason-Principle
 falling from a loftier essence to a lower? This means that the
 Reason-Principle upon "the birth of Aphrodite" left the Intellectual
 for the Soul, breaking into the garden of Zeus.
 
 A garden is a place of beauty and a glory of wealth: all the
 loveliness that Zeus maintains takes its splendour from the
 Reason-Principle within him; for all this beauty is the radiation of
 the Divine Intellect upon the Divine Soul, which it has penetrated.
 What could the Garden of Zeus indicate but the images of his 
 Being and
 the splendours of his glory? And what could these divine splendours
 and beauties be but the Ideas streaming from him?
 
 These Reason-Principles- this Poros who is the lavishness, the
 abundance of Beauty- are at one and are made manifest; this is the
 Nectar-drunkenness. For the Nectar of the gods can be no other than
 what the god-nature essentially demands; and this is the Reason
 pouring down from the divine Mind.
 
 The Intellectual Principle possesses Itself to satiety, but
 there is no "drunken" abandonment in this possession which brings
 nothing alien to it. But the Reason-Principle- as its offspring, a
 later hypostasis- is already a separate Being and established in
 another Realm, and so is said to lie in the garden of this 
 Zeus who is
 divine Mind; and this lying in the garden takes place at the moment
 when, in our way of speaking, Aphrodite enters the realm of Being.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. "Our way of speaking"- for myths, if they are to serve their
 purpose, must necessarily import time-distinctions into their
 subject and will often present as separate, Powers which exist in
 unity but differ in rank and faculty; they will relate the births of
 the unbegotten and discriminate where all is one substance; the
 truth is conveyed in the only manner possible, it is left to our
 good sense to bring all together again.
 
 On this principle we have, here, Soul dwelling with the divine
 Intelligence, breaking away from it, and yet again being filled to
 satiety with the divine Ideas- the beautiful abounding in all
 plenty, so that every splendour become manifest in it with the
 images of whatever is lovely- Soul which, taken as one all, is
 Aphrodite, while in it may be distinguished the Reason-Principles
 summed under the names of Plenty and Possession, produced by the
 downflow of the Nectar of the over realm. The splendours contained
 in Soul are thought of as the garden of Zeus with reference to their
 existing within Life; and Poros sleeps in this garden in the sense
 of being sated and heavy with its produce. Life is eternally 
 manifest,
 an eternal existent among the existences, and the banqueting of the
 gods means no more than that they have their Being in that vital
 blessedness. And Love- "born at the banquet of the gods"- has of
 necessity been eternally in existence, for it springs from the
 intention of the Soul towards its Best, towards the Good; as long as
 Soul has been, Love has been.
 
 Still this Love is of mixed quality. On the one hand there is in
 it the lack which keeps it craving: on the other, it is not entirely
 destitute; the deficient seeks more of what it has, and certainly
 nothing absolutely void of good would ever go seeking the good.
 
 It is said then to spring from Poverty and Possession in 
 the sense
 that Lack and Aspiration and the Memory of the Ideal Principles, all
 present together in the Soul, produce that Act towards The Good
 which is Love. Its Mother is Poverty, since striving is for 
 the needy;
 and this Poverty is Matter, for Matter is the wholly poor: the very
 ambition towards the good is a sign of existing 
 indetermination; there
 is a lack of shape and of Reason in that which must aspire 
 towards the
 Good, and the greater degree of effort implies the lower depth of
 materiality. A thing aspiring towards the Good is an Ideal-principle
 only when the striving [with attainment] will leave it still 
 unchanged
 in Kind: when it must take in something other than itself, its
 aspiration is the presentment of Matter to the incoming power.
 
 Thus Love is at once, in some degree a thing of Matter and at
 the same time a Celestial, sprung of the Soul; for Love 
 lacks its Good
 but, from its very birth, strives towards It.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SIXTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 THE IMPASSIVITY OF THE UNEMBODIED.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. In our theory, feelings are not states; they are action upon
 experience, action accompanied by judgement: the states, we hold,
 are seated elsewhere; they may be referred to the vitalized body;
 the judgement resides in the Soul, and is distinct from the state-
 for, if it is not distinct, another judgement is demanded, 
 one that is
 distinct, and, so, we may be sent back for ever.
 
 Still, this leaves it undecided whether in the act of judgement
 the judging faculty does or does not take to itself something of its
 object.
 
 If the judging faculty does actually receive an imprint, then it
 partakes of the state- though what are called the Impressions may be
 of quite another nature than is supposed; they may be like Thought,
 that is to say they may be acts rather than states; there 
 may be, here
 too, awareness without participation.
 
 For ourselves, it could never be in our system- or in our
 liking- to bring the Soul down to participation in such modes and
 modifications as the warmth and cold of material frames.
 
 What is known as the Impressionable faculty of the soul- to
 pathetikon- would need to be identified: we must satisfy ourselves
 as to whether this too, like the Soul as a unity, is to be classed
 as immune or, on the contrary, as precisely the only part
 susceptible of being affected; this question, however, may be held
 over; we proceed to examine its preliminaries.
 
 Even in the superior phase of the Soul- that which precedes the
 impressionable faculty and any sensation- how can we reconcile
 immunity with the indwelling of vice, false notions, ignorance?
 Inviolability; and yet likings and dislikings, the Soul enjoying,
 grieving, angry, grudging, envying, desiring, never at peace but
 stirring and shifting with everything that confronts it!
 
 If the Soul were material and had magnitude, it would be
 difficult, indeed quite impossible, to make it appear to be immune,
 unchangeable, when any of such emotions lodge in it. And even
 considering it as an Authentic Being, devoid of magnitude and
 necessarily indestructible, we must be very careful how we attribute
 any such experiences to it or we will find ourselves unconsciously
 making it subject to dissolution. If its essence is a Number or as
 we hold a Reason-Principle, under neither head could it be 
 susceptible
 of feeling. We can think, only, that it entertains unreasoned
 reasons and experiences unexperienced, all transmuted from the
 material frames, foreign and recognized only by parallel, so that it
 possesses in a kind of non-possession and knows affection without
 being affected. How this can be demands enquiry.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Let us begin with virtue and vice in the Soul. What has
 really occurred when, as we say, vice is present? In speaking of
 extirpating evil and implanting goodness, of introducing order and
 beauty to replace a former ugliness, we talk in terms of real things
 in the Soul.
 
 Now when we make virtue a harmony, and vice a breach of harmony,
 we accept an opinion approved by the ancients; and the 
 theory helps us
 decidedly to our solution. For if virtue is simply a natural
 concordance among the phases of the Soul, and vice simply a discord,
 then there is no further question of any foreign presence; harmony
 would be the result of every distinct phase or faculty joining in,
 true to itself; discord would mean that not all chimed in at their
 best and truest. Consider, for example, the performers in a choral
 dance; they sing together though each one has his particular 
 part, and
 sometimes one voice is heard while the others are silent; and each
 brings to the chorus something of his own; it is not enough that all
 lift their voices together; each must sing, choicely, his own part
 to the music set for him. Exactly so in the case of the Soul; there
 will be harmony when each faculty performs its appropriate part.
 
 Yes: but this very harmony constituting the virtue of the Soul
 must depend upon a previous virtue, that of each several faculty
 within itself; and before there can be the vice of discord there
 must be the vice of the single parts, and these can be bad 
 only by the
 actual presence of vice as they can be good only by the presence of
 virtue. It is true that no presence is affirmed when vice is
 identified with ignorance in the reasoning faculty of the Soul;
 ignorance is not a positive thing; but in the presence of false
 judgements- the main cause of vice- must it not be admitted that
 something positive has entered into the Soul, something 
 perverting the
 reasoning faculty? So, the initiative faculty; is it not, itself,
 altered as one varies between timidity and boldness? And the
 desiring faculty, similarly, as it runs wild or accepts control?
 
 Our teaching is that when the particular faculty is sound it
 performs the reasonable act of its essential nature, obeying the
 reasoning faculty in it which derives from the Intellectual
 Principle and communicates to the rest. And this following of reason
 is not the acceptance of an imposed shape; it is like using the
 eyes; the Soul sees by its act, that of looking towards reason. The
 faculty of sight in the performance of its act is essentially what
 it was when it lay latent; its act is not a change in it, but simply
 its entering into the relation that belongs to its essential
 character; it knows- that is, sees- without suffering any change:
 so, precisely, the reasoning phase of the Soul stands towards the
 Intellectual Principle; this it sees by its very essence; this
 vision is its knowing faculty; it takes in no stamp, no impression;
 all that enters it is the object of vision- possessed, once more,
 without possession; it possesses by the fact of knowing but "without
 possession" in the sense that there is no incorporation of anything
 left behind by the object of vision, like the impression of the seal
 on sealing-wax.
 
 And note that we do not appeal to stored-up impressions 
 to account
 for memory: we think of the mind awakening its powers in 
 such a way as
 to possess something not present to it.
 
 Very good: but is it not different before and after acquiring
 the memory?
 
 Be it so; but it has suffered no change- unless we are 
 to think of
 the mere progress from latency to actuality as change- nothing has
 been introduced into the mind; it has simply achieved the 
 Act dictated
 by its nature.
 
 It is universally true that the characteristic Act of immaterial
 entities is performed without any change in them- otherwise 
 they would
 at last be worn away- theirs is the Act of the unmoving; where act
 means suffering change, there is Matter: an immaterial Being would
 have no ground of permanence if its very Act changed it.
 
 Thus in the case of Sight, the seeing faculty is in act but the
 material organ alone suffers change: judgements are similar to
 visual experiences.
 
 But how explain the alternation of timidity and daring in the
 initiative faculty?
 
 Timidity would come by the failure to look towards the
 Reason-Principle or by looking towards some inferior phase 
 of it or by
 some defect in the organs of action- some lack or flaw in the bodily
 equipment- or by outside prevention of the natural act or by the
 mere absence of adequate stimulus: boldness would arise from the
 reverse conditions: neither implies any change, or even any
 experience, in the Soul.
 
 So with the faculty of desire: what we call loose living 
 is caused
 by its acting unaccompanied; it has done all of itself; the other
 faculties, whose business it is to make their presence felt 
 in control
 and to point the right way, have lain in abeyance; the Seer in the
 Soul was occupied elsewhere, for, though not always at least
 sometimes, it has leisure for a certain degree of contemplation of
 other concerns.
 
 Often, moreover, the vice of the desiring faculty will be merely
 some ill condition of the body, and its virtue, bodily 
 soundness; thus
 there would again be no question of anything imported into the Soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. But how do we explain likings and aversions? Sorrow, too, and
 anger and pleasure, desire and fear- are these not changes,
 affectings, present and stirring within the Soul?
 
 This question cannot be ignored. To deny that changes take place
 and are intensely felt is in sharp contradiction to obvious facts.
 But, while we recognize this, we must make very sure what it is that
 changes. To represent the Soul or Mind as being the seat of these
 emotions is not far removed from making it blush or turn pale; it is
 to forget that while the Soul or Mind is the means, the effect takes
 place in the distinct organism, the animated body.
 
 At the idea of disgrace, the shame is in the Soul; but 
 the body is
 occupied by the Soul- not to trouble about words- is, at any rate,
 close to it and very different from soulless matter; and so, is
 affected in the blood, mobile in its nature. Fear begins in the
 mind; the pallor is simply the withdrawal of the blood inwards. So
 in pleasure, the elation is mental, but makes itself felt in 
 the body;
 the purely mental phase has not reached the point of sensation: the
 same is true of pain. So desire is ignored in the Soul where the
 impulse takes its rise; what comes outward thence, the Sensibility
 knows.
 
 When we speak of the Soul or Mind being moved- as in desire,
 reasoning, judging- we do not mean that it is driven into its act;
 these movements are its own acts.
 
 In the same way when we call Life a movement we have no idea of
 a changing substance; the naturally appropriate act of each member
 of the living thing makes up the Life, which is, therefore, not a
 shifting thing.
 
 To bring the matter to the point: put it that life, tendency,
 are no changements; that memories are not forms stamped upon 
 the mind,
 that notions are not of the nature of impressions on sealing-wax; we
 thence draw the general conclusion that in all such states and
 movements the Soul, or Mind, is unchanged in substance and 
 in essence,
 that virtue and vice are not something imported into the 
 Soul- as heat
 and cold, blackness or whiteness are importations into body- 
 but that,
 in all this relation, matter and spirit are exactly and
 comprehensively contraries.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. We have, however, still to examine what is called the 
 affective
 phase of the Soul. This has, no doubt, been touched upon above where
 we dealt with the passions in general as grouped about the
 initiative phase of the Soul and the desiring faculty in its 
 effort to
 shape things to its choice: but more is required; we must begin by
 forming a clear idea of what is meant by this affective 
 faculty of the
 Soul.
 
 In general terms it means the centre about which we recognize
 the affections to be grouped; and by affections we mean those states
 upon which follow pleasure and pain.
 
 Now among these affections we must distinguish. Some are pivoted
 upon judgements; thus, a Man judging his death to be at hand may
 feel fear; foreseeing some fortunate turn of events, he is happy:
 the opinion lies in one sphere; the affection is stirred in another.
 Sometimes the affections take the lead and automatically bring in
 the notion which thus becomes present to the appropriate faculty:
 but as we have explained, an act of opinion does not introduce any
 change into the Soul or Mind: what happens is that from the notion
 of some impending evil is produced the quite separate thing, 
 fear, and
 this fear, in turn, becomes known in that part of the Mind which is
 said under such circumstances to harbour fear.
 
 But what is the action of this fear upon the Mind?
 
 The general answer is that it sets up trouble and 
 confusion before
 an evil anticipated. It should, however, be quite clear that the
 Soul or Mind is the seat of all imaginative representation- both the
 higher representation known as opinion or judgement and the lower
 representation which is not so much a judgement as a vague notion
 unattended by discrimination, something resembling the action by
 which, as is believed, the "Nature" of common speech produces,
 unconsciously, the objects of the partial sphere. It is equally
 certain that in all that follows upon the mental act or state, the
 disturbance, confined to the body, belongs to the sense-order;
 trembling, pallor, inability to speak, have obviously nothing to do
 with the spiritual portion of the being. The Soul, in fact, 
 would have
 to be described as corporeal if it were the seat of such symptoms:
 besides, in that case the trouble would not even reach the body
 since the only transmitting principle, oppressed by sensation,
 jarred out of itself, would be inhibited.
 
 None the less, there is an affective phase of the Soul 
 or Mind and
 this is not corporeal; it can be, only, some kind of Ideal-form.
 
 Now Matter is the one field of the desiring faculty, as of the
 principles of nutrition growth and engendering, which are root and
 spring to desire and to every other affection known to this
 Ideal-form. No Ideal-form can be the victim of disturbance or be in
 any way affected: it remains in tranquillity; only the Matter
 associated with it can be affected by any state or experience
 induced by the movement which its mere presence suffices to set up.
 Thus the vegetal Principle induces vegetal life but it does not,
 itself, pass through the processes of vegetation; it gives growth
 but it does not grow; in no movement which it originates is it moved
 with the motion it induces; it is in perfect repose, or, at 
 least, its
 movement, really its act, is utterly different from what it causes
 elsewhere.
 
 The nature of an Ideal-form is to be, of itself, an activity; it
 operates by its mere presence: it is as if Melody itself plucked the
 strings. The affective phase of the Soul or Mind will be the 
 operative
 cause of all affection; it originates the movement either under the
 stimulus of some sense-presentment or independently- and it is a
 question to be examined whether the judgement leading to the
 movement operates from above or not- but the affective phase itself
 remains unmoved like Melody dictating music. The causes originating
 the movement may be likened to the musician; what is moved 
 is like the
 strings of his instrument, and once more, the Melodic 
 Principle itself
 is not affected, but only the strings, though, however much the
 musician desired it, he could not pluck the strings except under
 dictation from the principle of Melody.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. But why have we to call in Philosophy to make the Soul immune
 if it is thus immune from the beginning?
 
 Because representations attack it at what we call the affective
 phase and cause a resulting experience, a disturbance, to which
 disturbance is joined the image of threatened evil: this 
 amounts to an
 affection and Reason seeks to extinguish it, to ban it as
 destructive to the well-being of the Soul which by the mere 
 absence of
 such a condition is immune, the one possible cause of affection not
 being present.
 
 Take it that some such affections have engendered appearances
 presented before the Soul or Mind from without but taken [for
 practical purposes] to be actual experiences within it- then
 Philosophy's task is like that of a man who wishes to throw off the
 shapes presented in dreams, and to this end recalls to waking
 condition the mind that is breeding them.
 
 But what can be meant by the purification of a Soul that 
 has never
 been stained and by the separation of the Soul from a body 
 to which it
 is essentially a stranger?
 
 The purification of the Soul is simply to allow it to be 
 alone; it
 is pure when it keeps no company; when it looks to nothing without
 itself; when it entertains no alien thoughts- be the mode or 
 origin of
 such notions or affections what they may, a subject on which we have
 already touched- when it no longer sees in the world of image, much
 less elaborates images into veritable affections. Is it not a true
 purification to turn away towards the exact contrary of earthly
 things?
 
 Separation, in the same way, is the condition of a soul no
 longer entering into the body to lie at its mercy; it is to 
 stand as a
 light, set in the midst of trouble but unperturbed through all.
 
 In the particular case of the affective phase of the Soul,
 purification is its awakening from the baseless visions which beset
 it, the refusal to see them; its separation consists in limiting its
 descent towards the lower and accepting no picture thence, and of
 course in the banning for its part too of all which the higher Soul
 ignores when it has arisen from the trouble storm and is no longer
 bound to the flesh by the chains of sensuality and of 
 multiplicity but
 has subdued to itself the body and its entire surrounding so that it
 holds sovereignty, tranquilly, over all.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. the Intellectual Essence, wholly of the order of Ideal-form,
 must be taken as impassive has been already established.
 
 But Matter also is an incorporeal, though after a mode 
 of its own;
 we must examine, therefore, how this stands, whether it is 
 passive, as
 is commonly held, a thing that can be twisted to every shape 
 and Kind,
 or whether it too must be considered impassive and in what sense and
 fashion so. But in engaging this question and defining the nature of
 matter we must correct certain prevailing errors about the nature of
 the Authentic Existent, about Essence, about Being.
 
 The Existent- rightly so called- is that which has authentic
 existence, that, therefore, which is existent completely, and
 therefore, again, that which at no point fails in existence. Having
 existence perfectly, it needs nothing to preserve it in being; it
 is, on the contrary, the source and cause from which all that
 appears to exist derives that appearance. This admitted, it must of
 necessity be in life, in a perfect life: if it failed it 
 would be more
 nearly the nonexistent than the existent. But: The Being thus
 indicated is Intellect, is wisdom unalloyed. It is, therefore,
 determined and rounded off; it is nothing potentially that is not of
 the same determined order, otherwise it would be in default.
 
 Hence its eternity, its identity, its utter irreceptivity and
 impermeability. If it took in anything, it must be taking in 
 something
 outside itself, that is to say, Existence would at last include
 non-existence. But it must be Authentic Existence all through; it
 must, therefore, present itself equipped from its own stores with
 all that makes up Existence so that all stands together and 
 all is one
 thing. The Existent [Real Being] must have thus much of 
 determination:
 if it had not, then it could not be the source of the Intellectual
 Principle and of Life which would be importations into it
 originating in the sphere of non-Being; and Real Being would be
 lifeless and mindless; but mindlessness and lifelessness are the
 characteristics of non-being and must belong to the lower order, to
 the outer borders of the existent; for Intellect and Life rise from
 the Beyond-Existence [the Indefinable Supreme]- though Itself has no
 need of them- and are conveyed from It into the Authentic Existent.
 
 If we have thus rightly described the Authentic Existent, we see
 that it cannot be any kind of body nor the under-stuff of body; in
 such entities the Being is simply the existing of things outside of
 Being.
 
 But body, a non-existence? Matter, on which all this universe
 rises, a non-existence? Mountain and rock, the wide solid earth, all
 that resists, all that can be struck and driven, surely all
 proclaims the real existence of the corporeal? And how, it will be
 asked, can we, on the contrary, attribute Being, and the only
 Authentic Being, to entities like Soul and Intellect, things 
 having no
 weight or pressure, yielding to no force, offering no resistance,
 things not even visible?
 
 Yet even the corporeal realm witnesses for us; the resting earth
 has certainly a scantier share in Being than belongs to what has
 more motion and less solidity- and less than belongs to its own most
 upward element, for fire begins, already, to flit up and away
 outside of the body-kind.
 
 In fact, it appears to be precisely the most self-sufficing that
 bear least hardly, least painfully, on other things, while the
 heaviest and earthiest bodies- deficient, falling, unable to bear
 themselves upward- these, by the very down-thrust due to their
 feebleness, offer the resistance which belongs to the falling habit
 and to the lack of buoyancy. It is lifeless objects that deal the
 severest blows; they hit hardest and hurt most; where there is life-
 that is to say participation in Being- there is beneficence towards
 the environment, all the greater as the measure of Being is fuller.
 
 Again, Movement, which is a sort of life within bodies, an
 imitation of true Life, is the more decided where there is the least
 of body a sign that the waning of Being makes the object 
 affected more
 distinctly corporeal.
 
 The changes known as affections show even more clearly that
 where the bodily quality is most pronounced susceptibility is at its
 intensest- earth more susceptible than other elements, and these
 others again more or less so in the degree of their corporeality:
 sever the other elements and, failing some preventive force, 
 they join
 again; but earthy matter divided remains apart indefinitely. Things
 whose nature represents a diminishment have no power of recuperation
 after even a slight disturbance and they perish; thus what has most
 definitely become body, having most closely approximated to
 non-being lacks the strength to reknit its unity: the heavy and
 violent crash of body against body works destruction, and weak is
 powerful against weak, non-being against its like.
 
 Thus far we have been meeting those who, on the evidence 
 of thrust
 and resistance, identify body with real being and find assurance of
 truth in the phantasms that reach us through the senses, those, in a
 word, who, like dreamers, take for actualities the figments of their
 sleeping vision. The sphere of sense, the Soul in its 
 slumber; for all
 of the Soul that is in body is asleep and the true getting-up is not
 bodily but from the body: in any movement that takes the body with
 it there is no more than a passage from sleep to sleep, from bed to
 bed; the veritable waking or rising is from corporeal things; for
 these, belonging to the Kind directly opposed to Soul, present to it
 what is directly opposed to its essential existence: their origin,
 their flux, and their perishing are the warning of their exclusion
 from the Kind whose Being is Authentic.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. We are thus brought back to the nature of that underlying
 matter and the things believed to be based upon it; 
 investigation will
 show us that Matter has no reality and is not capable of being
 affected.
 
 Matter must be bodiless- for body is a later production, a
 compound made by Matter in conjunction with some other 
 entity. Thus it
 is included among incorporeal things in the sense that body is
 something that is neither Real-Being nor Matter.
 
 Matter is no Soul; it is not Intellect, is not Life, is no
 Ideal-Principle, no Reason-Principle; it is no limit or bound, for
 it is mere indetermination; it is not a power, for what does it
 produce?
 
 It lives on the farther side of all these categories and 
 so has no
 tide to the name of Being. It will be more plausibly called a
 non-being, and this in the sense not of movement [away from Being]
 or station (in Not-Being) but of veritable Not-Being, so 
 that it is no
 more than the image and phantasm of Mass, a bare aspiration towards
 substantial existence; it is stationary but not in the sense 
 of having
 position, it is in itself invisible, eluding all effort to 
 observe it,
 present where no one can look, unseen for all our gazing,
 ceaselessly presenting contraries in the things based upon it; it is
 large and small, more and less, deficient and excessive; a phantasm
 unabiding and yet unable to withdraw- not even strong enough to
 withdraw, so utterly has it failed to accept strength from the
 Intellectual Principle, so absolute its lack of all Being.
 
 Its every utterance, therefore, is a lie; it pretends to be
 great and it is little, to be more and it is less; and the Existence
 with which it masks itself is no Existence, but a passing 
 trick making
 trickery of all that seems to be present in it, phantasms within a
 phantasm; it is like a mirror showing things as in itself when they
 are really elsewhere, filled in appearance but actually empty,
 containing nothing, pretending everything. Into it and out of it
 move mimicries of the Authentic Existents, images playing upon an
 image devoid of Form, visible against it by its very formlessness;
 they seem to modify it but in reality effect nothing, for they are
 ghostly and feeble, have no thrust and meet none in Matter either;
 they pass through it leaving no cleavage, as through water; or they
 might be compared to shapes projected so as to make some appearance
 upon what we can know only as the Void.
 
 Further: if visible objects were of the rank of the 
 originals from
 which they have entered into Matter we might believe Matter to be
 really affected by them, for we might credit them with some share of
 the power inherent in their Senders: but the objects of our
 experiences are of very different virtue than the realities they
 represent, and we deduce that the seeming modification of matter by
 visible things is unreal since the visible thing itself is unreal,
 having at no point any similarity with its source and cause. Feeble,
 in itself, a false thing and projected upon a falsity, like an image
 in dream or against water or on a mirror, it can but leave Matter
 unaffected; and even this is saying too little, for water and mirror
 do give back a faithful image of what presents itself before them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. It is a general principle that, to be modified, an object
 must be opposed in faculty, and in quality to the forces that enter
 and act upon it.
 
 Thus where heat is present, the change comes by something that
 chills, where damp by some drying agency: we say a subject 
 is modified
 when from warm it becomes cold, from dry wet.
 
 A further evidence is in our speaking of a fire being burned
 out, when it has passed over into another element; we do not say
 that the Matter has been burned out: in other words, modification
 affects what is subject to dissolution; the acceptance of 
 modification
 is the path towards dissolution; susceptibility to modification and
 susceptibility to dissolution go necessarily together. But Matter
 can never be dissolved. What into? By what process?
 
 Still: Matter harbours heat, cold, qualities beyond all count;
 by these it is differentiated; it holds them as if they were of its
 very substance and they blend within it- since no quality is found
 isolated to itself- Matter lies there as the meeting ground of all
 these qualities with their changes as they act and react in 
 the blend:
 how, then, can it fail to be modified in keeping? The only escape
 would be to declare Matter utterly and for ever apart from the
 qualities it exhibits; but the very notion of Substance implies that
 any and every thing present in it has some action upon it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. In answer: It must, first, be noted that there are a 
 variety of
 modes in which an object may be said to be present to another or to
 exist in another. There is a "presence" which acts by changing the
 object- for good or for ill- as we see in the case of bodies,
 especially where there is life. But there is also a "presence" which
 acts, towards good or ill, with no modification of the object, as we
 have indicated in the case of the Soul. Then there is the case
 represented by the stamping of a design upon wax, where the 
 "presence"
 of the added pattern causes no modification in the substance nor
 does its obliteration diminish it. And there is the example of Light
 whose presence does not even bring change of pattern to the object
 illuminated. A stone becoming cold does not change its nature in the
 process; it remains the stone it was. A drawing does not 
 cease to be a
 drawing for being coloured.
 
 The intermediary mass on which these surface changes appear is
 certainly not transmuted by them; but might there not be a
 modification of the underlying Matter?
 
 No: it is impossible to think of Matter being modified by, for
 instance, colour- for, of course we must not talk of 
 modification when
 there is no more than a presence, or at most a presenting of shape.
 
 Mirrors and transparent objects, even more, offer a close
 parallel; they are quite unaffected by what is seen in or through
 them: material things are reflections, and the Matter on which they
 appear is further from being affected than is a mirror. Heat and
 cold are present in Matter, but the Matter itself suffers no 
 change of
 temperature: growing hot and growing cold have to do only with
 quality; a quality enters and brings the impassible Substance under
 a new state- though, by the way, research into nature may show that
 cold is nothing positive but an absence, a mere negation. The
 qualities come together into Matter, but in most cases they can have
 no action upon each other; certainly there can be none between those
 of unlike scope: what effect, for example, could fragrance have on
 sweetness or the colour-quality on the quality of form, any 
 quality on
 another of some unrelated order? The illustration of the mirror may
 well indicate to us that a given substratum may contain something
 quite distinct from itself- even something standing to it as a
 direct contrary- and yet remain entirely unaffected by what is thus
 present to it or merged into it.
 
 A thing can be hurt only by something related to it, and 
 similarly
 things are not changed or modified by any chance presence:
 modification comes by contrary acting upon contrary; things merely
 different leave each other as they were. Such modification 
 by a direct
 contrary can obviously not occur in an order of things to which
 there is no contrary: Matter, therefore [the mere absence of
 Reality] cannot be modified: any modification that takes place can
 occur only in some compound of Matter and reality, or, speaking
 generally, in some agglomeration of actual things. The Matter
 itself- isolated, quite apart from all else, utterly simplex- must
 remain immune, untouched in the midst of all the interacting 
 agencies;
 just as when people fight within their four walls, the house and the
 air in it remain without part in the turmoil.
 
 We may take it, then, that while all the qualities and entities
 that appear upon Matter group to produce each the effect belonging
 to its nature, yet Matter itself remains immune, even more
 definitely immune than any of those qualities entering into it
 which, not being contraries, are not affected by each other.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. Further: If Matter were susceptible of modification, it must
 acquire something by the incoming of the new state; it will either
 adopt that state, or, at least, it will be in some way different
 from what it was. Now upon this first incoming quality suppose a
 second to supervene; the recipient is no longer Matter but a
 modification of Matter: this second quality, perhaps, departs, but
 it has acted and therefore leaves something of itself after it; the
 substratum is still further altered. This process proceeding, the
 substratum ends by becoming something quite different from Matter;
 it becomes a thing settled in many modes and many shapes; at once it
 is debarred from being the all-recipient; it will have closed the
 entry against many incomers. In other words, the Matter is no longer
 there: Matter is destructible.
 
 No: if there is to be a Matter at all, it must be always
 identically as it has been from the beginning: to speak of Matter as
 changing is to speak of it as not being Matter.
 
 Another consideration: it is a general principle that a thing
 changing must remain within its constitutive Idea so that the
 alteration is only in the accidents and not in the essential thing;
 the changing object must retain this fundamental permanence, and the
 permanent substance cannot be the member of it which accepts
 modification.
 
 Therefore there are only two possibilities: the first, 
 that Matter
 itself changes and so ceases to be itself, the second that it never
 ceases to be itself and therefore never changes.
 
 We may be answered that it does not change in its character as
 Matter: but no one could tell us in what other character it changes;
 and we have the admission that the Matter in itself is not subject
 to change.
 
 Just as the Ideal Principles stand immutably in their essence-
 which consists precisely in their permanence- so, since the 
 essence of
 Matter consists in its being Matter [the substratum to all material
 things] it must be permanent in this character; because it is
 Matter, it is immutable. In the Intellectual realm we have the
 immutable Idea; here we have Matter, itself similarly immutable.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. I think, in fact, that Plato had this in mind where he
 justly speaks of the Images of Real Existents "entering and passing
 out": these particular words are not used idly: he wishes us to
 grasp the precise nature of the relation between Matter and 
 the Ideas.
 
 The difficulty on this point is not really that which presented
 itself to most of our predecessors- how the Ideas enter into Matter-
 it is rather the mode of their presence in it.
 
 It is in fact strange at sight that Matter should remain itself
 intact, unaffected by Ideal-forms present within it, 
 especially seeing
 that these are affected by each other. It is surprising, 
 too, that the
 entrant Forms should regularly expel preceding shapes and qualities,
 and that the modification [which cannot touch Matter] should affect
 what is a compound [of Idea with Matter] and this, again, not a
 haphazard but precisely where there is need of the incoming or
 outgoing of some certain Ideal-form, the compound being deficient
 through the absence of a particular principle whose presence will
 complete it.
 
 But the reason is that the fundamental nature of Matter can take
 no increase by anything entering it, and no decrease by any
 withdrawal: what from the beginning it was, it remains. It 
 is not like
 those things whose lack is merely that of arrangement and order
 which can be supplied without change of substance as when we dress
 or decorate something bare or ugly.
 
 But where the bringing to order must cut through to the very
 nature, the base original must be transmuted: it can leave ugliness
 for beauty only by a change of substance. Matter, then, thus brought
 to order must lose its own nature in the supreme degree unless its
 baseness is an accidental: if it is base in the sense of being
 Baseness the Absolute, it could never participate in order, and, if
 evil in the sense of being Evil the Absolute, it could never
 participate in good.
 
 We conclude that Matter's participation in Idea is not by way of
 modification within itself: the process is very different; it is a
 bare seeming. Perhaps we have here the solution of the difficulty as
 to how Matter, essentially evil, can be reaching towards The Good:
 there would be no such participation as would destroy its essential
 nature. Given this mode of pseudo-participation- in which Matter
 would, as we say, retain its nature, unchanged, always being what it
 has essentially been- there is no longer any reason to wonder as to
 how while essentially evil, it yet participates in Idea: for, by
 this mode, it does not abandon its own character: 
 participation is the
 law, but it participates only just so far as its essence 
 allows. Under
 a mode of participation which allows it to remain on its own
 footing, its essential nature stands none the less, whatsoever the
 Idea, within that limit, may communicate to it: it is by no means
 the less evil for remaining immutably in its own order. If it had
 authentic participation in The Good and were veritably changed, it
 would not be essentially evil.
 
 In a word, when we call Matter evil we are right only if we mean
 that it is not amenable to modification by The Good; but that means
 simply that it is subject to no modification whatever.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. This is Plato's conception: to him participation does not,
 in the case of Matter, comport any such presence of an 
 Ideal-form in a
 Substance to be shaped by it as would produce one compound thing
 made up of the two elements changing at the same moment, merging
 into one another, modified each by the other.
 
 In his haste to his purpose he raises many difficult questions,
 but he is determined to disown that view; he labours to indicate in
 what mode Matter can receive the Ideal-forms without being, itself,
 modified. The direct way is debarred since it is not easy to point
 to things actually present in a base and yet leaving that base
 unaffected: he therefore devises a metaphor for participation
 without modification, one which supports, also, his thesis that all
 appearing to the senses is void of substantial existence and that
 the region of mere seeming is vast.
 
 Holding, as he does, that it is the patterns displayed 
 upon Matter
 that cause all experience in living bodies while the Matter itself
 remains unaffected, he chooses this way of stating its immutability,
 leaving us to make out for ourselves that those very patterns
 impressed upon it do not comport any experience, any modification,
 in itself.
 
 In the case, no doubt, of the living bodies that take one
 pattern or shape after having borne another, it might be said that
 there was a change, the variation of shape being made verbally
 equivalent to a real change: but since Matter is essentially without
 shape or magnitude, the appearing of shape upon it can by no freedom
 of phrase be described as a change within it. On this point one must
 have "a rule for thick and thin" one may safely say that the
 underlying Kind contains nothing whatever in the mode commonly
 supposed.
 
 But if we reject even the idea of its really containing at least
 the patterns upon it, how is it, in any sense, a recipient?
 
 The answer is that in the metaphor cited we have some reasonably
 adequate indication of the impassibility of Matter coupled with the
 presence upon it of what may be described as images of things not
 present.
 
 But we cannot leave the point of its impassibility without a
 warning against allowing ourselves to be deluded by sheer custom of
 speech.
 
 Plato speaks of Matter as becoming dry, wet, inflamed, 
 but we must
 remember the words that follow: "and taking the shape of air and of
 water": this blunts the expressions "becoming wet, becoming 
 inflamed";
 once we have Matter thus admitting these shapes, we learn that it
 has not itself become a shaped thing but that the shapes remain
 distinct as they entered. We see, further, that the expression
 "becoming inflamed" is not to be taken strictly: it is rather a case
 of becoming fire. Becoming fire is very different from becoming
 inflamed, which implies an outside agency and, therefore,
 susceptibility to modification. Matter, being itself a portion of
 fire, cannot be said to catch fire. To suggest that the fire not
 merely permeates the matter, but actually sets it on fire is like
 saying that a statue permeates its bronze.
 
 Further, if what enters must be an Ideal-Principle how could it
 set Matter aflame? But what if it is a pattern or condition? No: the
 object set aflame is so in virtue of the combination of Matter and
 condition.
 
 But how can this follow on the conjunction when no unity has
 been produced by the two?
 
 Even if such a unity had been produced, it would be a unity of
 things not mutually sharing experiences but acting upon each other.
 And the question would then arise whether each was effective upon
 the other or whether the sole action was not that of one (the form)
 preventing the other [the Matter] from slipping away?
 
 But when any material thing is severed, must not the Matter be
 divided with it? Surely the bodily modification and other experience
 that have accompanied the sundering, must have occurred,
 identically, within the Matter?
 
 This reasoning would force the destructibility of Matter upon
 us: "the body is dissolved; then the Matter is dissolved." We would
 have to allow Matter to be a thing of quantity, a magnitude. 
 But since
 it is not a magnitude it could not have the experiences that 
 belong to
 magnitude and, on the larger scale, since it is not body it cannot
 know the experiences of body.
 
 In fact those that declare Matter subject to modification may as
 well declare it body right out.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. Further, they must explain in what sense they hold 
 that Matter
 tends to slip away from its form [the Idea]. Can we conceive it
 stealing out from stones and rocks or whatever else envelops it?
 
 And of course they cannot pretend that Matter in some 
 cases rebels
 and sometimes not. For if once it makes away of its own will, why
 should it not always escape? If it is fixed despite itself, 
 it must be
 enveloped by some Ideal-Form for good and all. This, however, leaves
 still the question why a given portion of Matter does not remain
 constant to any one given form: the reason lies mainly in the fact
 that the Ideas are constantly passing into it.
 
 In what sense, then, is it said to elude form?
 
 By very nature and for ever?
 
 But does not this precisely mean that it never ceases to be
 itself, in other words that its one form is an invincible
 formlessness? In no other sense has Plato's dictum any value to
 those that invoke it.
 
 Matter [we read] is "the receptacle and nurse of all generation."
 
 Now if Matter is such a receptacle and nurse, all generation is
 distinct from it; and since all the changeable lies in the realm of
 generation, Matter, existing before all generation, must exist
 before all change.
 
 "Receptacle" and "nurse"; then it "retains its identity; 
 it is not
 subject to modification. Similarly if it is" [as again we read] "the
 ground on which individual things appear and disappear," and so,
 too, if it is a "place, a base." Where Plato describes and
 identifies it as "a ground to the ideas" he is not attributing any
 state to it; he is probing after its distinctive manner of being.
 
 And what is that?
 
 This which we think of as a Nature-Kind cannot be included among
 Existents but must utterly rebel from the Essence of Real Beings and
 be therefore wholly something other than they- for they are
 Reason-Principles and possess Authentic Existence- it must 
 inevitably,
 by virtue of that difference, retain its integrity to the point of
 being permanently closed against them and, more, of rejecting close
 participation in any image of them.
 
 Only on these terms can it be completely different: once it took
 any Idea to hearth and home, it would become a new thing, 
 for it would
 cease to be the thing apart, the ground of all else, the 
 receptacle of
 absolutely any and every form. If there is to be a ceaseless coming
 into it and going out from it, itself must be unmoved and immune in
 all the come and go. The entrant Idea will enter as an image, the
 untrue entering the untruth.
 
 But, at least, in a true entry?
 
 No: How could there be a true entry into that which, by being
 falsity, is banned from ever touching truth?
 
 Is this then a pseudo-entry into a pseudo-entity- 
 something merely
 brought near, as faces enter the mirror, there to remain just as
 long as the people look into it?
 
 Yes: if we eliminated the Authentic Existents from this Sphere
 nothing of all now seen in sense would appear one moment longer.
 
 Here the mirror itself is seen, for it is itself an Ideal-Form
 of a Kind [has some degree of Real Being]; but bare Matter, which is
 no Idea, is not a visible thing; if it were, it would have been
 visible in its own character before anything else appeared upon it.
 The condition of Matter may be illustrated by that of air penetrated
 by light and remaining, even so, unseen because it is invisible
 whatever happens.
 
 The reflections in the mirror are not taken to be real, all the
 less since the appliance on which they appear is seen and remains
 while the images disappear, but Matter is not seen either with the
 images or without them. But suppose the reflections on the mirror
 remaining and the mirror itself not seen, we would never doubt the
 solid reality of all that appears.
 
 If, then, there is, really, something in a mirror, we may
 suppose objects of sense to be in Matter in precisely that way: if
 in the mirror there is nothing, if there is only a seeming of
 something, then we may judge that in Matter there is the 
 same delusion
 and that the seeming is to be traced to the Substantial-Existence of
 the Real-Beings, that Substantial-Existence in which the 
 Authentic has
 the real participation while only an unreal participation can belong
 to the unauthentic since their condition must differ from that which
 they would know if the parts were reversed, if the Authentic 
 Existents
 were not and they were.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. But would this mean that if there were no Matter 
 nothing would
 exist?
 
 Precisely as in the absence of a mirror, or something of similar
 power, there would be no reflection.
 
 A thing whose very nature is to be lodged in something 
 else cannot
 exist where the base is lacking- and it is the character of a
 reflection to appear in something not itself.
 
 Of course supposing anything to desert from the Authentic
 Beings, this would not need an alien base: but these Beings are not
 subject to flux, and therefore any outside manifestation of them
 implies something other than themselves, something offering a base
 to what never enters, something which by its presence, in its
 insistence, by its cry for help, in its beggardom, strives as it
 were by violence to acquire and is always disappointed, so that its
 poverty is enduring, its cry unceasing.
 
 This alien base exists and the myth represents it as a pauper to
 exhibit its nature, to show that Matter is destitute of The Good.
 The claimant does not ask for all the Giver's store, but it welcomes
 whatever it can get; in other words, what appears in Matter is not
 Reality.
 
 The name, too [Poverty], conveys that Matter's need is never
 met. The union with Poros, Possession, is designed to show 
 that Matter
 does not attain to Reality, to Plenitude, but to some bare
 sufficiency- in point of fact to imaging skill.
 
 It is, of course, impossible that an outside thing belonging in
 any degree to Real-Being- whose Nature is to engender Real-Beings-
 should utterly fail of participation in Reality: but here we have
 something perplexing; we are dealing with utter Non-Being,
 absolutely without part in Reality; what is this participation by
 the non-participant, and how does mere neighbouring confer 
 anything on
 that which by its own nature is precluded from any association?
 
 The answer is that all that impinges upon this Non-Being is
 flung back as from a repelling substance; we may think of an Echo
 returned from a repercussive plane surface; it is precisely 
 because of
 the lack of retention that the phenomenon is supposed to belong to
 that particular place and even to arise there.
 
 If Matter were participant and received Reality to the extent
 which we are apt to imagine, it would be penetrated by a Reality
 thus sucked into its constitution. But we know that the 
 Entrant is not
 thus absorbed: Matter remains as it was, taking nothing to itself:
 it is the check to the forthwelling of Authentic Existence; it is a
 ground that repels; it is a mere receptacle to the Realities as they
 take their common path and here meet and mingle. It resembles those
 reflecting vessels, filled with water, which are often set 
 against the
 sun to produce fire: the heat rays- prevented, by their contrary
 within, from being absorbed- are flung out as one mass.
 
 It is in this sense and way that Matter becomes the cause of the
 generated realm; the combinations within it hold together only after
 some such reflective mode.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. Now the objects attracting the sun-rays to themselves-
 illuminated by a fire of the sense-order- are necessarily of the
 sense-order; there is perceptibility because there has been 
 a union of
 things at once external to each other and continuous, contiguous, in
 direct contact, two extremes in one line. But the Reason-Principle
 operating upon Matter is external to it only in a very different
 mode and sense: exteriority in this case is amply supplied by
 contrariety of essence and can dispense with any opposite ends [any
 question of lineal position]; or, rather, the difference is one that
 actually debars any local extremity; sheer incongruity of 
 essence, the
 utter failure in relationship, inhibits admixture [between Matter
 and any form of Being].
 
 The reason, then, of the immutability of Matter is that the
 entrant principle neither possesses it nor is possessed by it.
 Consider, as an example, the mode in which an opinion or
 representation is present in the mind; there is no admixture; the
 notion that came goes in its time, still integrally itself alone,
 taking nothing with it, leaving nothing after it, because it has not
 been blended with the mind; there is no "outside" in the sense of
 contact broken, and the distinction between base and entrant 
 is patent
 not to the senses but to the reason.
 
 In that example, no doubt, the mental representation- though it
 seems to have a wide and unchecked control- is an image, while the
 Soul [Mind] is in its nature not an image [but a Reality]: none the
 less the Soul or Mind certainly stands to the concept as 
 Matter, or in
 some analogous relation. The representation, however, does not cover
 the Mind over; on the contrary it is often expelled by some activity
 there; however urgently it presses in, it never effects such an
 obliteration as to be taken for the Soul; it is confronted there by
 indwelling powers, by Reason-Principles, which repel all such attack.
 
 Matter- feebler far than the Soul for any exercise of power, and
 possessing no phase of the Authentic Existents, not even in 
 possession
 of its own falsity- lacks the very means of manifesting itself,
 utter void as it is; it becomes the means by which other things
 appear, but it cannot announce its own presence. Penetrating thought
 may arrive at it, discriminating it from Authentic 
 Existence; then, it
 is discerned as something abandoned by all that really is, 
 by even the
 dimmest semblants of being, as a thing dragged towards every 
 shape and
 property and appearing to follow- yet in fact not even following.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. An Ideal-Principle approaches and leads Matter towards some
 desired dimension, investing this non-existent underlie with a
 magnitude from itself which never becomes incorporate- for Matter,
 if it really incorporated magnitude, would be a mass.
 
 Eliminate this Ideal-Form and the substratum ceases to be a
 thing of magnitude, or to appear so: the mass produced by the Idea
 was, let us suppose, a man or a horse; the horse-magnitude came upon
 the Matter when a horse was produced upon it; when the horse 
 ceases to
 exist upon the Matter, the magnitude of the horse departs also. If
 we are told that the horse implies a certain determined bulk and
 that this bulk is a permanent thing, we answer that what is
 permanent in this case is not the magnitude of the horse but the
 magnitude of mass in general. That same Magnitude might be fire or
 earth; on their disappearance their particular magnitudes would
 disappear with them. Matter, then, can never take to itself either
 pattern or magnitude; if it did, it would no longer be able to turn
 from being fire, let us say, into being something else; it would
 become and be fire once for all.
 
 In a word, though Matter is far extended- so vastly as to appear
 co-extensive with all this sense-known Universe- yet if the Heavens
 and their content came to an end, all magnitude would simultaneously
 pass from Matter with, beyond a doubt, all its other properties; it
 would be abandoned to its own Kind, retaining nothing of all that
 which, in its own peculiar mode, it had hitherto exhibited.
 
 Where an entrant force can effect modification it will
 inevitably leave some trace upon its withdrawal; but where there can
 be no modification, nothing can be retained; light comes and 
 goes, and
 the air is as it always was.
 
 That a thing essentially devoid of magnitude should come to a
 certain size is no more astonishing than that a thing essentially
 devoid of heat should become warm: Matter's essential existence is
 quite separate from its existing in bulk, since, of course,
 magnitude is an immaterial principle as pattern is. Besides, 
 if we are
 not to reduce Matter to nothing, it must be all things by way of
 participation, and Magnitude is one of those all things.
 
 In bodies, necessarily compounds, Magnitude though not a
 determined Magnitude must be present as one of the 
 constituents; it is
 implied in the very notion of body; but Matter- not a Body- excludes
 even undetermined Magnitude.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. Nor can we, on the other hand, think that matter is simply
 Absolute Magnitude.
 
 Magnitude is not, like Matter, a receptacle; it is an
 Ideal-Principle: it is a thing standing apart to itself, not some
 definite Mass. The fact is that the self-gathered content of the
 Intellectual Principle or of the All-Soul, desires expansion [and
 thereby engenders secondaries]: in its images- aspiring and moving
 towards it and eagerly imitating its act- is vested a 
 similar power of
 reproducing their states in their own derivatives. The Magnitude
 latent in the expansive tendency of the Image-making phase [of
 Intellect or All-Soul] runs forth into the Absolute Magnitude of the
 Universe; this in turn enlists into the process the spurious 
 magnitude
 of Matter: the content of the Supreme, thus, in virtue of its own
 prior extension enables Matter- which never possesses a content- to
 exhibit the appearance of Magnitude. It must be understood that
 spurious Magnitude consists in the fact that a thing [Matter] not
 possessing actual Magnitude strains towards it and has the extension
 of that straining. All that is Real Being gives forth a reflection
 of itself upon all else; every Reality, therefore, has 
 Magnitude which
 by this process is communicated to the Universe.
 
 The Magnitude inherent in each Ideal-Principle- that of 
 a horse or
 of anything else- combines with Magnitude the Absolute with 
 the result
 that, irradiated by that Absolute, Matter entire takes Magnitude and
 every particle of it becomes a mass; in this way, by virtue 
 at once of
 the totality of Idea with its inherent magnitude and of each several
 specific Idea, all things appear under mass; Matter takes on what we
 conceive as extension; it is compelled to assume a relation 
 to the All
 and, gathered under this Idea and under Mass, to be all 
 things- in the
 degree in which the operating power can lead the really nothing to
 become all.
 
 By the conditions of Manifestation, colour rises from non-colour
 [= from the colourless prototype of colour in the Ideal Realm].
 Quality, known by the one name with its parallel in the sphere of
 Primals, rises, similarly, from non-quality: in precisely the same
 mode, the Magnitude appearing upon Matter rises from non-Magnitude
 or from that Primal which is known to us by the same name; so that
 material things become visible through standing midway between bare
 underlie and Pure Idea. All is perceptible by virtue of this 
 origin in
 the Intellectual Sphere but all is falsity since the base in 
 which the
 manifestation takes place is a non-existent.
 
 Particular entities thus attain their Magnitude through being
 drawn out by the power of the Existents which mirror themselves and
 make space for themselves in them. And no violence is 
 required to draw
 them into all the diversity of Shapes and Kinds because the 
 phenomenal
 All exists by Matter [by Matter's essential all-receptivity] and
 because each several Idea, moreover, draws Matter its own way by the
 power stored within itself, the power it holds from the Intellectual
 Realm. Matter is manifested in this sphere as Mass by the 
 fact that it
 mirrors the Absolute Magnitude; Magnitude here is the reflection in
 the mirror. The Ideas meet all of necessity in Matter [the 
 Ultimate of
 the emanatory progress]: and Matter, both as one total thing and in
 its entire scope, must submit itself, since it is the Material of
 the entire Here, not of any one determined thing: what is, in its
 own character, no determined thing may become determined by 
 an outside
 force- though, in becoming thus determined, it does not become the
 definite thing in question, for thus it would lose its own
 characteristic indetermination.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. The Ideal Principle possessing the Intellection [= Idea,
 Noesis] of Magnitude- assuming that this Intellection is of 
 such power
 as not merely to subsist within itself but to be urged outward as it
 were by the intensity of its life- will necessarily realize itself
 in a Kind [= Matter] not having its being in the Intellective
 Principle, not previously possessing the Idea of Magnitude or any
 trace of that Idea or any other.
 
 What then will it produce [in this Matter] by virtue of that
 power?
 
 Not horse or cow: these are the product of other Ideas.
 
 No: this Principle comes from the source of Magnitude [= 
 is primal
 "Magnitude"] and therefore Matter can have no extension, in which to
 harbour the Magnitude of the Principle, but can take in only its
 reflected appearance.
 
 To the thing which does not enjoy Magnitude in the sense 
 of having
 mass-extension in its own substance and parts, the only 
 possibility is
 that it present some partial semblance of Magnitude, such as being
 continuous, not here and there and everywhere, that its parts be
 related within it and ungapped. An adequate reflection of a 
 great mass
 cannot be produced in a small space- mere size prevents- but the
 greater, pursuing the hope of that full self-presentment, makes
 progress towards it and brings about a nearer approach to adequate
 mirroring in the parallel from which it can never withhold its
 radiation: thus it confers Magnitude upon that [= Matter] which has
 none and cannot even muster up the appearance of having any, and the
 visible resultant exhibits the Magnitude of mass.
 
 Matter, then, wears Magnitude as a dress thrown about it by its
 association with that Absolute Magnitude to whose movement it must
 answer; but it does not, for that, change its Kind; if the Idea
 which has clothed it were to withdraw, it would once again be what
 it permanently is, what it is by its own strength, or it would have
 precisely the Magnitude lent to it by any other form that happens to
 be present in it.
 
 The [Universal] Soul- containing the Ideal Principles of
 Real-Beings, and itself an Ideal Principle- includes all in
 concentration within itself, just as the Ideal Principle of each
 particular entity is complete and self-contained: it, therefore,
 sees these principles of sensible things because they are turned, as
 it were, towards it and advancing to it: but it cannot 
 harbour them in
 their plurality, for it cannot depart from its Kind; it sees them,
 therefore, stripped of Mass. Matter, on the contrary, destitute of
 resisting power since it has no Act of its own and is a mere shadow,
 can but accept all that an active power may choose to send. 
 In what is
 thus sent, from the Reason-Principle in the Intellectual Realm,
 there is already contained a degree of the partial object that is to
 be formed: in the image-making impulse within the Reason-Principle
 there is already a step [towards the lower manifestation] or we may
 put it that the downward movement from the Reason-Principle 
 is a first
 form of the partial: utter absence of partition would mean 
 no movement
 but [sterile] repose. Matter cannot be the home of all things in
 concentration as the Soul is: if it were so, it would belong to the
 Intellective Sphere. It must be all-recipient but not in 
 that partless
 mode. It is to be the Place of all things, and it must therefore
 extend universally, offer itself to all things, serve to all 
 interval:
 thus it will be a thing unconfined to any moment [of space or time]
 but laid out in submission to all that is to be.
 
 But would we not expect that some one particularized form should
 occupy Matter [at once] and so exclude such others as are not able
 to enter into combination?
 
 No: for there is no first Idea except the Ideal Principle of the
 Universe- and, by this Idea, Matter is [the seat of] all things at
 once and of the particular thing in its parts- for the Matter of a
 living being is disparted according to the specific parts of the
 organism: if there were no such partition nothing would exist but
 the Reason-Principle.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 19
 
 19. The Ideal Principles entering into Matter as to a Mother [to
 be "born into the Universe"] affect it neither for better nor for
 worse.
 
 Their action is not upon Matter but upon each other; these
 powers conflict with their opponent principles, not with their
 substrata- which it would be foolish to confuse with the entrant
 forms- Heat [the Principle] annuls Cold, and Blackness annuls
 Whiteness; or, the opponents blend to form an intermediate quality.
 Only that is affected which enters into combinations: being affected
 is losing something of self-identity.
 
 In beings of soul and body, the affection occurs in the body,
 modified according to the qualities and powers presiding at 
 the act of
 change: in all such dissolution of constituent parts, in the new
 combinations, in all variation from the original structure, the
 affection is bodily, the Soul or Mind having no more than an
 accompanying knowledge of the more drastic changes, or perhaps not
 even that. [Body is modified: Mind knows] but the Matter concerned
 remains unaffected; heat enters, cold leaves it, and it is unchanged
 because neither Principle is associated with it as friend or enemy.
 
 So the appellation "Recipient and Nurse" is the better
 description: Matter is the mother only in the sense indicated; it
 has no begetting power. But probably the term Mother is used by
 those who think of a Mother as Matter to the offspring, as a 
 container
 only, giving nothing to them, the entire bodily frame of the child
 being formed out of food. But if this Mother does give 
 anything to the
 offspring it does so not in its quality as Matter but as being an
 Ideal-Form; for only the Idea is generative; the contrary Kind is
 sterile.
 
 This, I think, is why the doctors of old, teaching 
 through symbols
 and mystic representations, exhibit the ancient Hermes with the
 generative organ always in active posture; this is to convey that
 the generator of things of sense is the Intellectual Reason 
 Principle:
 the sterility of Matter, eternally unmoved, is indicated by the
 eunuchs surrounding it in its representation as the All-Mother.
 
 This too exalting title is conferred upon it in order to
 indicate that it is the source of things in the sense of being their
 underlie: it is an approximate name chosen for a general conception;
 there is no intention of suggesting a complete parallel with
 motherhood to those not satisfied with a surface impression but
 needing a precisely true presentment; by a remote symbolism, the
 nearest they could find, they indicate that Matter is sterile, not
 female to full effect, female in receptivity only, not in pregnancy:
 this they accomplish by exhibiting Matter as approached by what is
 neither female nor effectively male, but castrated of that
 impregnating power which belongs only to the unchangeably masculine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SEVENTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 TIME AND ETERNITY.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Eternity and Time; two entirely separate things, we explain
 "the one having its being in the everlasting Kind, the other in the
 realm of Process, in our own Universe"; and, by continually using
 the words and assigning every phenomenon to the one or the other
 category, we come to think that, both by instinct and by the more
 detailed attack of thought, we hold an adequate experience of them
 in our minds without more ado.
 
 When, perhaps, we make the effort to clarify our ideas and close
 into the heart of the matter we are at once unsettled: our doubts
 throw us back upon ancient explanations; we choose among the various
 theories, or among the various interpretations of some one 
 theory, and
 so we come to rest, satisfied, if only we can counter a question
 with an approved answer, and glad to be absolved from 
 further enquiry.
 
 Now, we must believe that some of the venerable philosophers of
 old discovered the truth; but it is important to examine 
 which of them
 really hit the mark and by what guiding principle we can ourselves
 attain to certitude.
 
 What, then, does Eternity really mean to those who describe it
 as something different from Time? We begin with Eternity, since when
 the standing Exemplar is known, its representation in image- which
 Time is understood to be- will be clearly apprehended- 
 though it is of
 course equally true, admitting this relationship to Time as image to
 Eternity the original, that if we chose to begin by identifying Time
 we could thence proceed upwards by Recognition [the Platonic
 Anamnesis] and become aware of the Kind which it images.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. What definition are we to give to Eternity?
 
 Can it be identified with the [divine or] Intellectual Substance
 itself?
 
 This would be like identifying Time with the Universe of Heavens
 and Earth- an opinion, it is true, which appears to have had its
 adherents. No doubt we conceive, we know, Eternity as something most
 august; most august, too, is the Intellectual Kind; and there is no
 possibility of saying that the one is more majestic than the other,
 since no such degrees can be asserted in the Above-World; there is
 therefore a certain excuse for the identification- all the more
 since the Intellectual Substance and Eternity have the one scope and
 content.
 
 Still; by the fact of representing the one as contained 
 within the
 other, by making Eternity a predicate to the Intellectual Existents-
 "the Nature of the Exemplar," we read, "is eternal"- we cancel the
 identification; Eternity becomes a separate thing, something
 surrounding that Nature or lying within it or present to it. And the
 majestic quality of both does not prove them identical: it might be
 transmitted from the one to the other. So, too, Eternity and the
 Divine Nature envelop the same entities, yes; but not in the 
 same way:
 the Divine may be thought of as enveloping parts, Eternity as
 embracing its content in an unbroken whole, with no implication of
 part, but merely from the fact that all eternal things are so by
 conforming to it.
 
 May we, perhaps, identify Eternity with Repose-There as Time has
 been identified with Movement-Here?
 
 This would bring on the counter-question whether Eternity is
 presented to us as Repose in the general sense or as the Repose that
 envelops the Intellectual Essence.
 
 On the first supposition we can no more talk of Repose being
 eternal than of Eternity being eternal: to be eternal is to
 participate in an outside thing, Eternity.
 
 Further, if Eternity is Repose, what becomes of Eternal
 Movement, which, by this identification, would become a thing of
 Repose?
 
 Again, the conception of Repose scarcely seems to include that
 of perpetuity- I am speaking of course not of perpetuity in the
 time-order (which might follow on absence of movement) but of that
 which we have in mind when we speak of Eternity.
 
 If, on the other hand, Eternity is identified with the Repose of
 the divine Essence, all species outside of the divine are put
 outside of Eternity.
 
 Besides, the conception of Eternity requires not merely 
 Repose but
 also unity- and, in order to keep it distinct from Time, a unity
 including interval- but neither that unity nor that absence of
 interval enters into the conception of Repose as such.
 
 Lastly, this unchangeable Repose in unity is a predicate
 asserted of Eternity, which, therefore, is not itself Repose, the
 absolute, but a participant in Repose.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. What, then, can this be, this something in virtue of which we
 declare the entire divine Realm to be Eternal, everlasting? We must
 come to some understanding of this perpetuity with which Eternity is
 either identical or in conformity.
 
 It must at once, be at once something in the nature of unity and
 yet a notion compact of diversity, or a Kind, a Nature, that waits
 upon the Existents of that Other World, either associated 
 with them or
 known in and upon them, they collectively being this Nature which,
 with all its unity, is yet diverse in power and essence. Considering
 this multifarious power, we declare it to be Essence in its relation
 to this sphere which is substratum or underlie to it; where we see
 life we think of it as Movement; where all is unvaried self-identity
 we call it Repose; and we know it as, at once, Difference 
 and Identity
 when we recognize that all is unity with variety.
 
 Then we reconstruct; we sum all into a collected unity once
 more, a sole Life in the Supreme; we concentrate Diversity 
 and all the
 endless production of act: thus we know Identity, a concept or,
 rather, a Life never varying, not becoming what previously 
 it was not,
 the thing immutably itself, broken by no interval; and knowing this,
 we know Eternity.
 
 We know it as a Life changelessly motionless and ever holding
 the Universal content [time, space, and phenomena] in actual 
 presence;
 not this now and now that other, but always all; not existing now in
 one mode and now in another, but a consummation without part or
 interval. All its content is in immediate concentration as at one
 point; nothing in it ever knows development: all remains identical
 within itself, knowing nothing of change, for ever in a Now since
 nothing of it has passed away or will come into being, but what it
 is now, that it is ever.
 
 Eternity, therefore- while not the Substratum [not the essential
 foundation of the Divine or Intellectual Principle]- may be 
 considered
 as the radiation of this Substratum: it exists as the announcement
 of the Identity in the Divine, of that state- of being thus and not
 otherwise- which characterizes what has no futurity but eternally is.
 
 What future, in fact, could bring to that Being anything which
 it now does not possess; and could it come to be anything which it
 is not once for all?
 
 There exists no source or ground from which anything could make
 its way into that standing present; any imagined entrant 
 will prove to
 be not alien but already integral. And as it can never come to be
 anything at present outside it, so, necessarily, it cannot 
 include any
 past; what can there be that once was in it and now is gone? 
 Futurity,
 similarly, is banned; nothing could be yet to come to it. Thus no
 ground is left for its existence but that it be what it is.
 
 That which neither has been nor will be, but simply possesses
 being; that which enjoys stable existence as neither in process of
 change nor having ever changed- that is Eternity. Thus we come to
 the definition: the Life- instantaneously entire, complete, at no
 point broken into period or part- which belongs to the Authentic
 Existent by its very existence, this is the thing we were 
 probing for-
 this is Eternity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. We must, however, avoid thinking of it as an accidental from
 outside grafted upon that Nature: it is native to it, integral to it.
 
 It is discerned as present essentially in that Nature like
 everything else that we can predicate There- all immanent, springing
 from that Essence and inherent to that Essence. For whatsoever has
 primal Being must be immanent to the Firsts and be a First-Eternity
 equally with The Good that is among them and of them and equally
 with the truth that is among them.
 
 In one aspect, no doubt, Eternity resides in a partial phase of
 the All-Being; but in another aspect it is inherent in the All taken
 as a totality, since that Authentic All is not a thing patched up
 out of external parts, but is authentically an all because its parts
 are engendered by itself. It is like the truthfulness in the Supreme
 which is not an agreement with some outside fact or being but is
 inherent in each member about which it is the truth. To an authentic
 All it is not enough that it be everything that exists: it must
 possess allness in the full sense that nothing whatever is 
 absent from
 it. Then nothing is in store for it: if anything were to come, that
 thing must have been lacking to it, and it was, therefore, not All.
 And what, of a Nature contrary to its own, could enter into 
 it when it
 is [the Supreme and therefore] immune? Since nothing can 
 accrue to it,
 it cannot seek change or be changed or ever have made its way into
 Being.
 
 Engendered things are in continuous process of acquisition;
 eliminate futurity, therefore, and at once they lose their being; if
 the non-engendered are made amenable to futurity they are thrown
 down from the seat of their existence, for, clearly, existence is
 not theirs by their nature if it appears only as a being about to
 be, a becoming, an advancing from stage to stage.
 
 The essential existence of generated things seems to lie in
 their existing from the time of their generation to the ultimate of
 time after which they cease to be: but such an existence is 
 compact of
 futurity, and the annulment of that futurity means the 
 stopping of the
 life and therefore of the essential existence.
 
 Such a stoppage would be true, also, of the [generated] All in
 so far as it is a thing of process and change: for this reason it
 keeps hastening towards its future, dreading to rest, seeking to
 draw Being to itself by a perpetual variety of production and action
 and by its circling in a sort of ambition after Essential Existence.
 
 And here we have, incidentally, lighted upon the cause of the
 Circuit of the All; it is a movement which seeks perpetuity by way
 of futurity.
 
 The Primals, on the contrary, in their state of blessedness have
 no such aspiration towards anything to come: they are the whole,
 now; what life may be thought of as their due, they possess entire;
 they, therefore, seek nothing, since there is nothing future to
 them, nothing external to them in which any futurity could find
 lodgement.
 
 Thus the perfect and all-comprehensive essence of the Authentic
 Existent does not consist merely in the completeness inherent in its
 members; its essence includes, further, its established immunity
 from all lack with the exclusion, also, of all that is without
 Being- for not only must all things be contained in the All 
 and Whole,
 but it can contain nothing that is, or was ever, non-existent- and
 this State and Nature of the Authentic Existent is Eternity: in our
 very word, Eternity means Ever-Being.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. This Ever-Being is realized when upon examination of an
 object I am able to say- or rather, to know- that in its very Nature
 it is incapable of increment or change; anything that fails by that
 test is no Ever-Existent or, at least, no Ever-All-Existent.
 
 But is perpetuity enough in itself to constitute an Eternal?
 
 No: the object must, farther, include such a Nature-Principle as
 to give the assurance that the actual state excludes all future
 change, so that it is found at every observation as it always was.
 
 Imagine, then, the state of a being which cannot fall away from
 the vision of this but is for ever caught to it, held by the spell
 of its grandeur, kept to it by virtue of a nature itself 
 unfailing- or
 even the state of one that must labour towards Eternity by directed
 effort, but then to rest in it, immoveable at any point 
 assimilated to
 it, co-eternal with it, contemplating Eternity and the 
 Eternal by what
 is Eternal within the self.
 
 Accepting this as a true account of an eternal, a perdurable
 Existent- one which never turns to any Kind outside itself, that
 possesses life complete once for all, that has never received any
 accession, that is now receiving none and will never receive any- we
 have, with the statement of a perduring Being, the statement also of
 perdurance and of Eternity: perdurance is the corresponding state
 arising from the [divine] substratum and inherent in it; 
 Eternity [the
 Principle as distinguished from the property of everlastingness] is
 that substratum carrying that state in manifestation.
 
 Eternity, thus, is of the order of the supremely great; it
 proves on investigation to be identical with God: it may fitly be
 described as God made manifest, as God declaring what He is, as
 existence without jolt or change, and therefore as also the firmly
 living.
 
 And it should be no shock that we find plurality in it; each of
 the Beings of the Supreme is multiple by virtue of unlimited force;
 for to be limitless implies failing at no point, and Eternity is
 pre-eminently the limitless since (having no past or future) 
 it spends
 nothing of its own substance.
 
 Thus a close enough definition of Eternity would be that it is a
 life limitless in the full sense of being all the life there is and
 a life which, knowing nothing of past or future to shatter its
 completeness, possesses itself intact for ever. To the notion of a
 Life (a Living-Principle) all-comprehensive add that it never spends
 itself, and we have the statement of a Life instantaneously infinite.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. Now the Principle this stated, all good and beauty, and
 everlasting, is centred in The One, sprung from It, and pointed
 towards It, never straying from It, but ever holding about It and in
 It and living by Its law; and it is in this reference, as I judge,
 that Plato- finely, and by no means inadvertently but with profound
 intention- wrote those words of his, "Eternity stable in Unity"; he
 wishes to convey that Eternity is not merely something 
 circling on its
 traces into a final unity but has [instantaneous] Being about The
 One as the unchanging Life of the Authentic Existent. This is
 certainly what we have been seeking: this Principle, at rest within
 rest with the One, is Eternity; possessing this stable quality,
 being itself at once the absolute self-identical and none 
 the less the
 active manifestation of an unchanging Life set towards the Divine
 and dwelling within It, untrue, therefore, neither on the side of
 Being nor on the side of Life- this will be Eternity [the Real-Being
 we have sought].
 
 Truly to be comports never lacking existence and never knowing
 variety in the mode of existence: Being is, therefore,
 self-identical throughout, and, therefore, again is one
 undistinguishable thing. Being can have no this and that; it 
 cannot be
 treated in terms of intervals, unfoldings, progression, extension;
 there is no grasping any first or last in it.
 
 If, then, there is no first or last in this Principle, if
 existence is its most authentic possession and its very 
 self, and this
 in the sense that its existence is Essence or Life- then, once
 again, we meet here what we have been discussing, Eternity.
 
 Observe that such words as "always," "never," "sometimes" must
 be taken as mere conveniences of exposition: thus "always- 
 used in the
 sense not of time but of incorruptibility and endlessly complete
 scope- might set up the false notion of stage and interval. We might
 perhaps prefer to speak of "Being," without any attribute; but since
 this term is applicable to Essence and some writers have 
 used the word
 "Essence" for things of process, we cannot convey our meaning to
 them without introducing some word carrying the notion of perdurance.
 
 There is, of course, no difference between Being and Everlasting
 Being; just as there is none between a philosopher and a true
 philosopher: the attribute "true" came into use because there arose
 what masqueraded as philosophy; and for similar reasons
 "everlasting" was adjoined to "Being," and "Being" to "everlasting,"
 and we have [the tautology of] "Everlasting Being." We must take
 this "Everlasting" as expressing no more than Authentic Being: it is
 merely a partial expression of a potency which ignores all 
 interval or
 term and can look forward to nothing by way of addition to the All
 which it possesses. The Principle of which this is the statement
 will be the All-Existent, and, as being all, can have no failing or
 deficiency, cannot be at some one point complete and at some other
 lacking.
 
 Things and Beings in the Time order- even when to all appearance
 complete, as a body is when fit to harbour a soul- are still bound
 to sequence; they are deficient to the extent of that thing, Time,
 which they need: let them have it, present to them and 
 running side by
 side with them, and they are by that very fact incomplete;
 completeness is attributed to them only by an accident of language.
 
 But the conception of Eternity demands something which is in its
 nature complete without sequence; it is not satisfied by something
 measured out to any remoter time or even by something limitless,
 but, in its limitless reach, still having the progression of 
 futurity:
 it requires something immediately possessed of the due fullness of
 Being, something whose Being does not depend upon any quantity [such
 as instalments of time] but subsists before all quantity.
 
 Itself having no quantity, it can have no contact with anything
 quantitative since its Life cannot be made a thing of fragments, in
 contradiction to the partlessness which is its character; it must be
 without parts in the Life as in the essence.
 
 The phrase "He was good" [used by Plato of the Demiurge] 
 refers to
 the Idea of the All; and its very indefiniteness signifies the utter
 absense of relation to Time: so that even this Universe has had no
 temporal beginning; and if we speak of something "before" it, that
 is only in the sense of the Cause from which it takes its Eternal
 Existence. Plato used the word merely for the convenience of
 exposition, and immediately corrects it as inappropriate to the
 order vested with the Eternity he conceives and affirms.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Now comes the question whether, in all this discussion, we
 are not merely helping to make out a case for some other order of
 Beings and talking of matters alien to ourselves.
 
 But how could that be? What understanding can there be failing
 some point of contact? And what contact could there be with the
 utterly alien?
 
 We must then have, ourselves, some part or share in Eternity.
 
 Still, how is this possible to us who exist in Time?
 
 The whole question turns on the distinction between being in
 Time and being in Eternity, and this will be best realized by
 probing to the Nature of Time. We must, therefore, descend from
 Eternity to the investigation of Time, to the realm of Time: till
 now we have been taking the upward way; we must now take the 
 downward-
 not to the lowest levels but within the degree in which Time 
 itself is
 a descent from Eternity.
 
 If the venerable sages of former days had not treated of 
 Time, our
 method would be to begin by linking to [the idea of] Eternity [the
 idea of] its Next [its inevitable downward or outgoing subsequent in
 the same order], then setting forth the probable nature of 
 such a Next
 and proceeding to show how the conception thus formed 
 tallies with our
 own doctrine.
 
 But, as things are, our best beginning is to range over the most
 noteworthy of the ancient opinions and see whether any of them
 accord with ours.
 
 Existing explanations of Time seem to fall into three classes:
 
 Time is variously identified with what we know as 
 Movement, with a
 moved object, and with some phenomenon of Movement: obviously it
 cannot be Rest or a resting object or any phenomenon of rest, since,
 in its characteristic idea, it is concerned with change.
 
 Of those that explain it as Movement, some identify it with
 Absolute Movement [or with the total of Movement], others 
 with that of
 the All. Those that make it a moved object would identify it with
 the orb of the All. Those that conceive it as some 
 phenomenon, or some
 period, of Movement treat it, severally, either as a standard of
 measure or as something inevitably accompanying Movement, abstract
 or definite.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. Movement Time cannot be- whether a definite act of moving is
 meant or a united total made up of all such acts- since movement, in
 either sense, takes place in Time. And, of course, if there is any
 movement not in Time, the identification with Time becomes all the
 less tenable.
 
 In a word, Movement must be distinct from the medium in which it
 takes place.
 
 And, with all that has been said or is still said, one
 consideration is decisive: Movement can come to rest, can be
 intermittent; Time is continuous.
 
 We will be told that the Movement of the All is 
 continuous [and so
 may be identical with Time].
 
 But, if the reference is to the Circuit of the heavenly 
 system [it
 is not strictly continuous, or equable, since] the time taken in the
 return path is not that of the outgoing movement; the one is twice
 as long as the other: this Movement of the All proceeds, 
 therefore, by
 two different degrees; the rate of the entire journey is not that of
 the first half.
 
 Further, the fact that we hear of the Movement of the outermost
 sphere being the swiftest confirms our theory. Obviously, it is the
 swiftest of movements by taking the lesser time to traverse the
 greater space the very greatest- all other moving things are 
 slower by
 taking a longer time to traverse a mere segment of the same 
 extension:
 in other words, Time is not this movement.
 
 And, if Time is not even the movement of the Kosmic Sphere much
 less is it the sphere itself though that has been identified 
 with Time
 on the ground of its being in motion.
 
 Is it, then, some phenomenon or connection of Movement?
 
 Let us, tentatively, suppose it to be extent, or duration, of
 Movement.
 
 Now, to begin with, Movement, even continuous, has no unchanging
 extent [as Time the equable has], since, even in space, it may be
 faster or slower; there must, therefore, be some unit of standard
 outside it, by which these differences are measurable, and this
 outside standard would more properly be called Time. And failing
 such a measure, which extent would be Time, that of the fast 
 or of the
 slow- or rather which of them all, since these speed-differences are
 limitless?
 
 Is it the extent of the subordinate Movement [= movement 
 of things
 of earth]?
 
 Again, this gives us no unit since the movement is infinitely
 variable; we would have, thus, not Time but Times.
 
 The extent of the Movement of the All, then?
 
 The Celestial Circuit may, no doubt, be thought of in terms of
 quantity. It answers to measure- in two ways. First there is space;
 the movement is commensurate with the area it passes 
 through, and this
 area is its extent. But this gives us, still, space only, not Time.
 Secondly, the circuit, considered apart from distance traversed, has
 the extent of its continuity, of its tendency not to stop but to
 proceed indefinitely: but this is merely amplitude of 
 Movement; search
 it, tell its vastness, and, still, Time has no more appeared, no
 more enters into the matter, than when one certifies a high pitch of
 heat; all we have discovered is Motion in ceaseless succession, like
 water flowing ceaselessly, motion and extent of motion.
 
 Succession or repetition gives us Number- dyad, triad, etc.- and
 the extent traversed is a matter of Magnitude; thus we have Quantity
 of Movement- in the form of number, dyad, triad, decade, or in the
 form of extent apprehended in what we may call the amount of the
 Movement: but, the idea of Time we have not. That definite 
 Quantity is
 merely something occurring within Time, for, otherwise Time is not
 everywhere but is something belonging to Movement which thus would
 be its substratum or basic-stuff: once more, then, we would be
 making Time identical with Movement; for the extent of 
 Movement is not
 something outside it but is simply its continuousness, and 
 we need not
 halt upon the difference between the momentary and the continuous,
 which is simply one of manner and degree. The extended movement and
 its extent are not Time; they are in Time. Those that explain Time
 as extent of Movement must mean not the extent of the movement
 itself but something which determines its extension, something with
 which the movement keeps pace in its course. But what this something
 is, we are not told; yet it is, clearly, Time, that in which all
 Movement proceeds. This is what our discussion has aimed at from the
 first: "What, essentially, is Time?" It comes to this: we 
 ask "What is
 Time?" and we are answered, "Time is the extension of Movement in
 Time!"
 
 On the one hand Time is said to be an extension apart from and
 outside that of Movement; and we are left to guess what this 
 extension
 may be: on the other hand, it is represented as the extension of
 Movement; and this leaves the difficulty what to make of the 
 extension
 of Rest- though one thing may continue as long in repose as 
 another in
 motion, so that we are obliged to think of one thing Time that
 covers both Rest and Movements, and, therefore, stands distinct from
 either.
 
 What then is this thing of extension? To what order of 
 beings does
 it belong?
 
 It obviously is not spatial, for place, too, is something
 outside it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. "A Number, a Measure, belonging to Movement?"
 
 This, at least, is plausible since Movement is a continuous
 thin; but let us consider.
 
 To begin with, we have the doubt which met us when we probed its
 identification with extent of Movement: is Time the measure 
 of any and
 every Movement?
 
 Have we any means of calculating disconnected and lawless
 Movement? What number or measure would apply? What would be the
 principle of such a Measure?
 
 One Measure for movement slow and fast, for any and every
 movement: then that number and measure would be like the decade, by
 which we reckon horses and cows, or like some common standard for
 liquids and solids. If Time is this Kind of Measure, we learn, no
 doubt, of what objects it is a Measure- of Movements- but we are no
 nearer understanding what it is in itself.
 
 Or: we may take the decade and think of it, apart from the
 horses or cows, as a pure number; this gives us a measure which,
 even though not actually applied, has a definite nature. Is Time,
 perhaps, a Measure in this sense?
 
 No: to tell us no more of Time in itself than that it is such a
 number is merely to bring us back to the decade we have already
 rejected, or to some similar collective figure.
 
 If, on the other hand, Time is [not such an abstraction but] a
 Measure possessing a continuous extent of its own, it must have
 quantity, like a foot-rule; it must have magnitude: it will,
 clearly, be in the nature of a line traversing the path of Movement.
 But, itself thus sharing in the movement, how can it be a Measure of
 Movement? Why should the one of the two be the measure 
 rather than the
 other? Besides an accompanying measure is more plausibly 
 considered as
 a measure of the particular movement it accompanies than of Movement
 in general. Further, this entire discussion assumes continuous
 movement, since the accompanying principle; Time, is itself unbroken
 [but a full explanation implies justification of Time in repose].
 
 The fact is that we are not to think of a measure outside and
 apart, but of a combined thing, a measured Movement, and we are to
 discover what measures it.
 
 Given a Movement measured, are we to suppose the measure to be a
 magnitude?
 
 If so, which of these two would be Time, the measured movement
 or the measuring magnitude? For Time [as measure] must be either the
 movement measured by magnitude, or the measuring magnitude itself or
 something using the magnitude like a yard-stick to appraise the
 movement. In all three cases, as we have indicated, the 
 application is
 scarcely plausible except where continuous movement is 
 assumed: unless
 the Movement proceeds smoothly, and even unintermittently and as
 embracing the entire content of the moving object, great
 difficulties arise in the identification of Time with any kind of
 measure.
 
 Let us, then, suppose Time to be this "measured Movement,"
 measured by quantity. Now the Movement if it is to be measured
 requires a measure outside itself; this was the only reason for
 raising the question of the accompanying measure. In exactly the
 same way the measuring magnitude, in turn, will require a measure,
 because only when the standard shows such and such an extension can
 the degree of movement be appraised. Time then will be, not the
 magnitude accompanying the Movement, but that numerical 
 value by which
 the magnitude accompanying the Movement is estimated. But that
 number can be only the abstract figure which represents the 
 magnitude,
 and it is difficult to see how an abstract figure can perform the
 act of measuring.
 
 And, supposing that we discover a way in which it can, we still
 have not Time, the measure, but a particular quantity of Time, not
 at all the same thing: Time means something very different from any
 definite period: before all question as to quantity is the 
 question as
 to the thing of which a certain quantity is present.
 
 Time, we are told, is the number outside Movement and measuring
 it, like the tens applied to the reckoning of the horses and cows
 but not inherent in them: we are not told what this Number is; yet,
 applied or not, it must, like that decade, have some nature of its
 own.
 
 Or "it is that which accompanies a Movement and measures 
 it by its
 successive stages"; but we are still left asking what this thing
 recording the stages may be.
 
 In any case, once a thing- whether by point or standard or any
 other means- measures succession, it must measure according to time:
 this number appraising movement degree by degree must, therefore, if
 it is to serve as a measure at all, be something dependent upon time
 and in contact with it: for, either, degree is spatial, merely- the
 beginning and end of the Stadium, for example- or in the only
 alternative, it is a pure matter of Time: the succession of early
 and late is stage of Time, Time ending upon a certain Now or Time
 beginning from a Now.
 
 Time, therefore, is something other than the mere number 
 measuring
 Movement, whether Movement in general or any particular tract of
 Movement.
 
 Further: Why should the mere presence of a number give us Time-
 a number measuring or measured; for the same number may be either-
 if Time is not given us by the fact of Movement itself, the Movement
 which inevitably contains in itself a succession of stages? To make
 the number essential to Time is like saying that magnitude 
 has not its
 full quantity unless we can estimate that quantity.
 
 Again, if Time is, admittedly, endless, how can number apply to
 it?
 
 Are we to take some portion of Time and find its numerical
 statement? That simply means that Time existed before number was
 applied to it.
 
 We may, therefore, very well think that it existed 
 before the Soul
 or Mind that estimates it- if, indeed, it is not to be 
 thought to take
 its origin from the Soul- for no measurement by anything is
 necessary to its existence; measured or not, it has the full 
 extent of
 its being.
 
 And suppose it to be true that the Soul is the appraiser, using
 Magnitude as the measuring standard, how does this help us to the
 conception of Time?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. Time, again, has been described as some sort of a sequence
 upon Movement, but we learn nothing from this, nothing is said,
 until we know what it is that produces this sequential 
 thing: probably
 the cause and not the result would turn out to be Time.
 
 And, admitting such a thing, there would still remain 
 the question
 whether it came into being before the movement, with it, or after
 it; and, whether we say before or with or after, we are speaking of
 order in Time: and thus our definition is "Time is a sequence upon
 movement in Time!"
 
 Enough: Our main purpose is to show what Time is, not to refute
 false definition. To traverse point by point the many opinions of
 our many predecessors would mean a history rather than an
 identification; we have treated the various theories as fully as is
 possible in a cursory review: and, notice, that which makes Time the
 Measure of the All-Movement is refuted by our entire discussion and,
 especially, by the observations upon the Measurement of Movement in
 general, for all the argument- except, of course, that from
 irregularity- applies to the All as much as to particular Movement.
 
 We are, thus, at the stage where we are to state what Time
 really is.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. To this end we must go back to the state we affirmed of
 Eternity, unwavering Life, undivided totality, limitless, knowing no
 divagation, at rest in unity and intent upon it. Time was not yet:
 or at least it did not exist for the Eternal Beings, though its
 being was implicit in the Idea and Principle of progressive
 derivation.
 
 But from the Divine Beings thus at rest within 
 themselves, how did
 this Time first emerge?
 
 We can scarcely call upon the Muses to recount its origin since
 they were not in existence then- perhaps not even if they had been.
 The engendered thing, Time, itself, can best tell us how it rose and
 became manifest; something thus its story would run:
 
 Time at first- in reality before that "first" was produced by
 desire of succession- Time lay, self-concentrated, at rest within
 the Authentic Existent: it was not yet Time; it was merged in the
 Authentic and motionless with it. But there was an active principle
 there, one set on governing itself and realizing itself [= the
 All-Soul], and it chose to aim at something more than its present:
 it stirred from its rest, and Time stirred with it. And we, stirring
 to a ceaseless succession, to a next, to the discrimination of
 identity and the establishment of ever-new difference, traversed a
 portion of the outgoing path and produced an image of Eternity,
 produced Time.
 
 For the Soul contained an unquiet faculty, always desirous of
 translating elsewhere what it saw in the Authentic Realm, 
 and it could
 not bear to retain within itself all the dense fullness of its
 possession.
 
 A Seed is at rest; the nature-principle within, uncoiling
 outwards, makes way towards what seems to it a large life; 
 but by that
 partition it loses; it was a unity self-gathered, and now, in going
 forth from itself, it fritters its unity away; it advances into a
 weaker greatness. It is so with this faculty of the Soul, when it
 produces the Kosmos known to sense- the mimic of the Divine Sphere,
 moving not in the very movement of the Divine but in its similitude,
 in an effort to reproduce that of the Divine. To bring this Kosmos
 into being, the Soul first laid aside its eternity and clothed
 itself with Time; this world of its fashioning it then gave 
 over to be
 a servant to Time, making it at every point a thing of Time, setting
 all its progressions within the bournes of Time. For the Kosmos
 moves only in Soul- the only Space within the range of the 
 All open to
 it to move in- and therefore its Movement has always been in the
 Time which inheres in Soul.
 
 Putting forth its energy in act after act, in a constant
 progress of novelty, the Soul produces succession as well as act;
 taking up new purposes added to the old it brings thus into 
 being what
 had not existed in that former period when its purpose was still
 dormant and its life was not as it since became: the life is changed
 and that change carries with it a change of Time. Time, then, is
 contained in differentiation of Life; the ceaseless forward movement
 of Life brings with it unending Time; and Life as it achieves its
 stages constitutes past Time.
 
 Would it, then, be sound to define Time as the Life of 
 the Soul in
 movement as it passes from one stage of act or experience to another?
 
 Yes; for Eternity, we have said, is Life in repose, unchanging,
 self-identical, always endlessly complete; and there is to 
 be an image
 of Eternity-Time- such an image as this lower All presents of the
 Higher Sphere. Therefore over against that higher life there must be
 another life, known by the same name as the more veritable 
 life of the
 Soul; over against that movement of the Intellectual Soul there must
 be the movement of some partial phase; over against that identity,
 unchangeableness and stability there must be that which is not
 constant in the one hold but puts forth multitudinous acts; over
 against that oneness without extent or interval there must 
 be an image
 of oneness, a unity of link and succession; over against the
 immediately infinite and all-comprehending, that which tends, yes,
 to infinity but by tending to a perpetual futurity; over against the
 Whole in concentration, there must be that which is to be a Whole by
 stages never final. The lesser must always be working towards the
 increase of its Being, this will be its imitation of what is
 immediately complete, self-realized, endless without stage: only
 thus can its Being reproduce that of the Higher.
 
 Time, however, is not to be conceived as outside of 
 Soul; Eternity
 is not outside of the Authentic Existent: nor is it to be taken as a
 sequence or succession to Soul, any more than Eternity is to the
 Divine. It is a thing seen upon Soul, inherent, coeval to it, as
 Eternity to the Intellectual Realm.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. We are brought thus to the conception of a
 Natural-Principle- Time- a certain expanse [a quantitative phase] of
 the Life of the Soul, a principle moving forward by smooth 
 and uniform
 changes following silently upon each other- a Principle, then, whose
 Act is sequent.
 
 But let us conceive this power of the Soul to turn back and
 withdraw from the life-course which it now maintains, from the
 continuous and unending activity of an ever-existent soul not
 self-contained or self-intent but concerned about doing and
 engendering: imagine it no longer accomplishing any Act, setting a
 pause to this work it has inaugurated; let this outgoing phase of
 the Soul become once more, equally with the rest, turned to the
 Supreme, to Eternal Being, to the tranquilly stable.
 
 What would then exist but Eternity?
 
 All would remain in unity; how could there be any diversity of
 things? What Earlier or Later would there be, what long-lasting or
 short-lasting? What ground would lie ready to the Soul's 
 operation but
 the Supreme in which it has its Being? Or, indeed, what operative
 tendency could it have even to That since a prior separation is the
 necessary condition of tendency?
 
 The very sphere of the Universe would not exist; for it cannot
 antedate Time: it, too, has its Being and its Movement in 
 Time; and if
 it ceased to move, the Soul-Act [which is the essence of Time]
 continuing, we could measure the period of its Repose by 
 that standard
 outside it.
 
 If, then, the Soul withdrew, sinking itself again into its
 primal unity, Time would disappear: the origin of Time, 
 clearly, is to
 be traced to the first stir of the Soul's tendency towards the
 production of the sensible universe with the consecutive act
 ensuing. This is how "Time"- as we read- "came into Being
 simultaneously" with this All: the Soul begot at once the 
 Universe and
 Time; in that activity of the Soul this Universe sprang into being;
 the activity is Time, the Universe is a content of Time. No doubt it
 will be urged that we read also of the orbit of the Stars being
 Times": but do not forget what follows; "the stars exist," we are
 told, "for the display and delimitation of Time," and "that there
 may be a manifest Measure." No indication of Time could be derived
 from [observation of] the Soul; no portion of it can be seen or
 handled, so it could not be measured in itself, especially when
 there was as yet no knowledge of counting; therefore the Soul brings
 into being night and day; in their difference is given Duality- from
 which, we read, arises the concept of Number.
 
 We observe the tract between a sunrise and its return and, as
 the movement is uniform, we thus obtain a Time-interval upon which
 to measure ourselves, and we use this as a standard. We have thus a
 measure of Time. Time itself is not a measure. How would it set to
 work? And what kind of thing is there of which it could say, "I find
 the extent of this equal to such and such a stretch of my 
 own extent?"
 What is this "I"? Obviously something by which measurement is known.
 Time, then, serves towards measurement but is not itself the
 Measure: the Movement of the All will be measured according to Time,
 but Time will not, of its own Nature, be a Measure of Movement:
 primarily a Kind to itself, it will incidentally exhibit the
 magnitudes of that movement.
 
 And the reiterated observation of Movement- the same extent
 found to be traversed in such and such a period- will lead to the
 conception of a definite quantity of Time past.
 
 This brings us to the fact that, in a certain sense, the 
 Movement,
 the orbit of the universe, may legitimately be said to measure Time-
 in so far as that is possible at all- since any definite stretch of
 that circuit occupies a certain quantity of Time, and this 
 is the only
 grasp we have of Time, our only understanding of it: what 
 that circuit
 measures- by indication, that is- will be Time, manifested by the
 Movement but not brought into being by it.
 
 This means that the measure of the Spheric Movement has itself
 been measured by a definite stretch of that Movement and therefore
 is something different; as measure, it is one thing and, as the
 measured, it is another; [its being measure or] its being measured
 cannot be of its essence.
 
 We are no nearer knowledge than if we said that the foot-rule
 measures Magnitude while we left the concept Magnitude undefined;
 or, again, we might as well define Movement- whose limitlessness
 puts it out of our reach- as the thing measured by Space; the
 definition would be parallel since we can mark off a certain space
 which the Movement has traversed and say the one is equivalent to
 the other.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. The Spheral Circuit, then, performed in Time, indicates it:
 but when we come to Time itself there is no question of its being
 "within" something else: it must be primary, a thing "within
 itself." It is that in which all the rest happens, in which all
 movement and rest exist smoothly and under order; something
 following a definite order is necessary to exhibit it and to 
 make it a
 subject of knowledge- though not to produce it- it is known by order
 whether in rest or in motion; in motion especially, for Movement
 better moves Time into our ken than rest can, and it is easier to
 estimate distance traversed than repose maintained.
 
 This last fact has led to Time being called a measure of Movement
 when it should have been described as something measured by Movement
 and then defined in its essential nature; it is an error to define
 it by a mere accidental concomitant and so to reverse the 
 actual order
 of things. Possibly, however, this reversal was not intended by the
 authors of the explanation: but, at any rate, we do not understand
 them; they plainly apply the term Measure to what is in reality the
 measured and leave us unable to grasp their meaning: our perplexity
 may be due to the fact that their writings- addressed to disciples
 acquainted with their teaching- do not explain what this thing,
 measure, or measured object, is in itself.
 
 Plato does not make the essence of Time consist in its being
 either a measure or a thing measured by something else.
 
 Upon the point of the means by which it is known, he remarks
 that the Circuit advances an infinitesimal distance for every
 infinitesimal segment of Time so that from that observation it is
 possible to estimate what the Time is, how much it amounts to: but
 when his purpose is to explain its essential nature he tells us that
 it sprang into Being simultaneously with the Heavenly system, a
 reproduction of Eternity, its image in motion, Time necessarily
 unresting as the Life with which it must keep pace: and "coeval with
 the Heavens" because it is this same Life [of the Divine Soul] which
 brings the Heavens also into being; Time and the Heavens are the
 work of the one Life.
 
 Suppose that Life, then, to revert- an impossibility- to perfect
 unity: Time, whose existence is in that Life, and the Heavens, no
 longer maintained by that Life, would end at once.
 
 It is the height of absurdity to fasten on the succession of
 earlier and later occurring in the life and movement of this 
 sphere of
 ours, to declare that it must be some definite thing and to call it
 Time, while denying the reality of the more truly existent Movement,
 that of the Soul, which has also its earlier and later: it cannot be
 reasonable to recognize succession in the case of the Soulless
 Movement- and so to associate Time with that- while ignoring
 succession and the reality of Time in the Movement from which the
 other takes its imitative existence; to ignore, that is, the very
 Movement in which succession first appears, a self-actuated movement
 which, engendering its own every operation, is the source of all
 that follows upon itself, to all which, it is the cause of
 existence, at once, and of every consequent.
 
 But:- we treat the Kosmic Movement as overarched by that of the
 Soul and bring it under Time; yet we do not set under Time that
 Soul-Movement itself with all its endless progression: what is our
 explanation of this paradox?
 
 Simply, that the Soul-Movement has for its Prior Eternity which
 knows neither its progression nor its extension. The descent towards
 Time begins with this Soul-Movement; it made Time and 
 harbours Time as
 a concomitant to its Act.
 
 And this is how Time is omnipresent: that Soul is absent from no
 fragment of the Kosmos just as our Soul is absent from no particle
 of ourselves. As for those who pronounce Time a thing of no
 substantial existence, of no reality, they clearly belie God Himself
 whenever they say "He was" or "He will be": for the existence
 indicated by the "was and will be" can have only such reality as
 belongs to that in which it is said to be situated:- but this school
 demands another type of argument.
 
 Meanwhile we have a supplementary observation to make.
 
 Take a man walking and observe the advance he has made; that
 advance gives you the quantity of movement he is employing: and when
 you know that quantity- represented by the ground traversed by his
 feet, for, of course, we are supposing the bodily movement to
 correspond with the pace he has set within himself- you know also
 the movement that exists in the man himself before the feet move.
 
 You must relate the body, carried forward during a given 
 period of
 Time, to a certain quantity of Movement causing the progress and to
 the Time it takes, and that again to the Movement, equal in 
 extension,
 within the man's soul.
 
 But the Movement within the Soul- to what are you to (relate)
 refer that?
 
 Let your choice fall where it may, from this point there is
 nothing but the unextended: and this is the primarily existent, the
 container to all else, having itself no container, brooking none.
 
 And, as with Man's Soul, so with the Soul of the All.
 
 "Is Time, then, within ourselves as well?"
 
 Time in every Soul of the order of the All-Soul, present in like
 form in all; for all the Souls are the one Soul.
 
 And this is why Time can never be broken apart, any more than
 Eternity which, similarly, under diverse manifestations, has 
 its Being
 as an integral constituent of all the eternal Existences.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 EIGHTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 NATURE CONTEMPLATION AND THE ONE.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Supposing we played a little before entering upon our serious
 concern and maintained that all things are striving after
 Contemplation, looking to Vision as their one end- and this, not
 merely beings endowed with reason but even the unreasoning animals,
 the Principle that rules in growing things, and the Earth that
 produces these- and that all achieve their purpose in the measure
 possible to their kind, each attaining Vision and possessing 
 itself of
 the End in its own way and degree, some things in entire reality,
 others in mimicry and in image- we would scarcely find anyone to
 endure so strange a thesis. But in a discussion entirely among
 ourselves there is no risk in a light handling of our own ideas.
 
 Well- in the play of this very moment am I engaged in the act of
 Contemplation?
 
 Yes; I and all that enter this play are in 
 Contemplation: our play
 aims at Vision; and there is every reason to believe that child or
 man, in sport or earnest, is playing or working only towards Vision,
 that every act is an effort towards Vision; the compulsory act,
 which tends rather to bring the Vision down to outward 
 things, and the
 act thought of as voluntary, less concerned with the outer,
 originate alike in the effort towards Vision.
 
 The case of Man will be treated later on; let us speak, first,
 of the earth and of the trees and vegetation in general, asking
 ourselves what is the nature of Contemplation in them, how we relate
 to any Contemplative activity the labour and productiveness of the
 earth, how Nature, held to be devoid of reason and even of conscious
 representation, can either harbour Contemplation or produce by means
 of the Contemplation which it does not possess.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. There is, obviously, no question here of hands or feet, of
 any implement borrowed or inherent: Nature needs simply the Matter
 which it is to work upon and bring under Form; its 
 productivity cannot
 depend upon mechanical operation. What driving or hoisting goes to
 produce all that variety of colour and pattern?
 
 The wax-workers, whose methods have been cited as parallel to
 the creative act of Nature, are unable to make colours; all they can
 do to impose upon their handicraft colours taken from elsewhere.
 None the less there is a parallel which demands attention: 
 in the case
 of workers in such arts there must be something locked within
 themselves, an efficacy not going out from them and yet guiding
 their hands in all their creation; and this observation should have
 indicated a similar phenomenon in Nature; it should be clear 
 that this
 indwelling efficacy, which makes without hands, must exist in
 Nature, no less than in the craftsman- but, there, as a thing
 completely inbound. Nature need possess no outgoing force as against
 that remaining within; the only moved thing is Matter; there 
 can be no
 moved phase in this Nature-Principle; any such moved phase could not
 be the primal mover; this Nature-Principle is no such moved 
 entity; it
 is the unmoved Principle operating in the Kosmos.
 
 We may be answered that the Reason-Principle is, no doubt,
 unmoved, but that the Nature-Principle, another being, operates by
 motion.
 
 But, if Nature entire is in question here, it is identical with
 the Reason-Principle; and any part of it that is unmoved is the
 Reason-Principle. The Nature-Principle must be an Ideal-Form, not a
 compound of Form and Matter; there is no need for it to possess
 Matter, hot and cold: the Matter that underlies it, on which it
 exercises its creative act, brings all that with it, or, natively
 without quality, becomes hot and cold, and all the rest, when
 brought under Reason: Matter, to become fire, demands the 
 approach not
 of fire but of a Reason-Principle.
 
 This is no slight evidence that in the animal and 
 vegetable realms
 the Reason-Principles are the makers and that Nature is a
 Reason-Principle producing a second Reason-Principle, its offspring,
 which, in turn, while itself, still, remaining intact, communicates
 something to the underlie, Matter.
 
 The Reason-Principle presiding over visible Shape is the very
 ultimate of its order, a dead thing unable to produce further: that
 which produces in the created realm is the living Reason-Principle-
 brother no doubt, to that which gives mere shape, but having
 life-giving power.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. But if this Reason-Principle [Nature] is in act- and produces
 by the process indicated- how can it have any part in Contemplation?
 
 To begin with, since in all its production it is stationary and
 intact, a Reason-Principle self-indwelling, it is in its own nature
 a Contemplative act. All doing must be guided by an Idea, and will
 therefore be distinct from that Idea: the Reason-Principle then, as
 accompanying and guiding the work, will be distinct from the 
 work; not
 being action but Reason-Principle it is, necessarily, Contemplation.
 Taking the Reason-Principle, the Logos, in all its phases, the
 lowest and last springs from a mental act [in the higher 
 Logos] and is
 itself a contemplation, though only in the sense of being
 contemplated, but above it stands the total Logos with its two
 distinguishable phases, first, that identified not as Nature but as
 All-Soul and, next, that operating in Nature and being itself the
 Nature-Principle.
 
 And does this Reason-Principle, Nature, spring from a
 contemplation?
 
 Wholly and solely?
 
 From self-contemplation, then? Or what are we to think? 
 It derives
 from a Contemplation and some contemplating Being; how are we to
 suppose it to have Contemplation itself?
 
 The Contemplation springing from the reasoning faculty- that, I
 mean, of planning its own content, it does not possess.
 
 But why not, since it is a phase of Life, a 
 Reason-Principle and a
 creative Power?
 
 Because to plan for a thing is to lack it: Nature does not lack;
 it creates because it possesses. Its creative act is simply its
 possession of it own characteristic Essence; now its 
 Essence, since it
 is a Reason-Principle, is to be at once an act of 
 contemplation and an
 object of contemplation. In other words, the, Nature-Principle
 produces by virtue of being an act of contemplation, an object of
 contemplation and a Reason-Principle; on this triple 
 character depends
 its creative efficacy.
 
 Thus the act of production is seen to be in Nature an act of
 contemplation, for creation is the outcome of a contemplation which
 never becomes anything else, which never does anything else, but
 creates by simply being a contemplation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. And Nature, asked why it brings forth its works, might answer
 if it cared to listen and to speak:
 
 
 "It would have been more becoming to put no question but to
 learn in silence just as I myself am silent and make no habit of
 talking. And what is your lesson? This; that whatsoever comes into
 being is my is my vision, seen in my silence, the vision that
 belongs to my character who, sprung from vision, am vision-loving
 and create vision by the vision-seeing faculty within me. The
 mathematicians from their vision draw their figures: but I draw
 nothing: I gaze and the figures of the material world take 
 being as if
 they fell from my contemplation. As with my Mother (the All-Soul]
 and the Beings that begot me so it is with me: they are born of a
 Contemplation and my birth is from them, not by their Act 
 but by their
 Being; they are the loftier Reason-Principles, they contemplate
 themselves and I am born."
 
 
 Now what does this tell us?
 
 It tells: that what we know as Nature is a Soul, offspring of a
 yet earlier Soul of more powerful life; that it possesses,
 therefore, in its repose, a vision within itself; that it has no
 tendency upward nor even downward but is at peace, steadfast, in its
 own Essence; that, in this immutability accompanied by what may be
 called Self-Consciousness, it possesses- within the measure of its
 possibility- a knowledge of the realm of subsequent things perceived
 in virtue of that understanding and consciousness; and, 
 achieving thus
 a resplendent and delicious spectacle, has no further aim.
 
 Of course, while it may be convenient to speak of
 "understanding" or "perception" in the Nature-Principle, this is not
 in the full sense applicable to other beings; we are 
 applying to sleep
 a word borrowed from the wake.
 
 For the Vision on which Nature broods, inactive, is a
 self-intuition, a spectacle laid before it by virtue of its
 unaccompanied self-concentration and by the fact that in itself it
 belongs to the order of intuition. It is a Vision silent but
 somewhat blurred, for there exists another a clearer of which Nature
 is the image: hence all that Nature produces is weak; the weaker act
 of intuition produces the weaker object.
 
 In the same way, human beings, when weak on the side of
 contemplation, find in action their trace of vision and of reason:
 their spiritual feebleness unfits them for contemplation; they are
 left with a void, because they cannot adequately seize the 
 vision; yet
 they long for it; they are hurried into action as their way to the
 vision which they cannot attain by intellection. They act from the
 desire of seeing their action, and of making it visible and sensible
 to others when the result shall prove fairly well equal to the plan.
 Everywhere, doing and making will be found to be either an 
 attenuation
 or a complement of vision-attenuation if the doer was aiming only at
 the thing done; complement if he is to possess something nobler to
 gaze upon than the mere work produced.
 
 Given the power to contemplate the Authentic, who would run, of
 choice, after its image?
 
 The relation of action to contemplation is indicated in the way
 duller children, inapt to study and speculation, take to crafts and
 manual labour.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. This discussion of Nature has shown us how the origin 
 of things
 is a Contemplation: we may now take the matter up to the higher
 Soul; we find that the Contemplation pursued by this, its instinct
 towards knowing and enquiring, the birth pangs set up by the 
 knowledge
 it attains, its teeming fullness, have caused it- in itself, all one
 object of Vision- to produce another Vision [that of the Kosmos]: it
 is just as a given science, complete in itself, becomes the 
 source and
 cause of what might be called a minor science in the student who
 attains to some partial knowledge of all its divisions. But the
 visible objects and the objects of intellectual contemplation of
 this later creation are dim and helpless by the side of the 
 content of
 the Soul.
 
 The primal phase of the Soul- inhabitant of the Supreme and, by
 its participation in the Supreme, filled and illuminated- remains
 unchangeably There; but in virtue of that first 
 participation, that of
 the primal participant, a secondary phase also participates in the
 Supreme, and this secondary goes forth ceaselessly as Life streaming
 from Life; for energy runs through the Universe and there is no
 extremity at which it dwindles out. But, travel as far as it may, it
 never draws that first part of itself from the place whence the
 outgoing began: if it did, it would no longer be everywhere [its
 continuous Being would be broken and] it would be present at the
 end, only, of its course.
 
 None the less that which goes forth cannot be equal to that
 which remains.
 
 In sum, then:
 
 The Soul is to extend throughout the Universe, no spot 
 void of its
 energy: but, a prior is always different from its secondary, and
 energy is a secondary, rising as it must from contemplation or act;
 act, however, is not at this stage existent since it depends upon
 contemplation: therefore the Soul, while its phases differ, must, in
 all of them, remain a contemplation and what seems to be an act done
 under contemplation must be in reality that weakened contemplation
 of which we have spoken: the engendered must respect the Kind, but
 in weaker form, dwindled in the descent.
 
 All goes softly since nothing here demands the parade of thought
 or act upon external things: it is a Soul in vision and, by this
 vision, creating its own subsequent- this Principle [of Nature],
 itself also contemplative but in the feebler degree since it lies
 further away and cannot reproduce the quality or experiences of its
 prior- a Vision creates the Vision.
 
 [Such creative contemplation is not inexplicable] for no limit
 exists either to contemplation or to its possible objects, and this
 explains how the Soul is universal: where can this thing fail to be,
 which is one identical thing in every Soul; Vision is not cabined
 within the bournes of magnitude.
 
 This, of course, does not mean that the Soul is present at the
 same strength in each and every place and thing- any more 
 than that it
 is at the same strength in each of its own phases.
 
 The Charioteer [the Leading Principle of the Soul, in 
 the Phaedrus
 Myth] gives the two horses [its two dissonant faculties] what he has
 seen and they, taking that gift, showed that they were 
 hungry for what
 made that vision; there was something lacking to them: if in their
 desire they acted, their action aimed at what they craved for- and
 that was vision, and an object of vision.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. Action, thus, is set towards contemplation and an object of
 contemplation, so that even those whose life is in doing have seeing
 as their object; what they have not been able to achieve by 
 the direct
 path, they hope to come at by the circuit.
 
 Further: suppose they succeed; they desired a certain thing to
 come about, not in order to be unaware of it but to know it, 
 to see it
 present before the mind: their success is the laying up of a vision.
 We act for the sake of some good; this means not for something to
 remain outside ourselves, not in order that we possess nothing but
 that we may hold the good of the action. And hold it, where? 
 Where but
 in the mind?
 
 Thus once more, action is brought back to contemplation: 
 for [mind
 or] Soul is a Reason-Principle and anything that one lays up in the
 Soul can be no other than a Reason-Principle, a silent 
 thing, the more
 certainly such a principle as the impression made is the deeper.
 
 This vision achieved, the acting instinct pauses; the mind is
 satisfied and seeks nothing further; the contemplation, in one so
 conditioned, remains absorbed within as having acquired certainty to
 rest upon. The brighter the certainty, the more tranquil is the
 contemplation as having acquired the more perfect unity; and- for
 now we come to the serious treatment of the subject-
 
 In proportion to the truth with which the knowing faculty knows,
 it comes to identification with the object of its knowledge.
 
 As long as duality persists, the two lie apart, parallel as it
 were to each other; there is a pair in which the two elements remain
 strange to one another, as when Ideal-Principles laid up in the mind
 or Soul remain idle.
 
 Hence the Idea must not be left to lie outside but must be made
 one identical thing with the soul of the novice so that he finds it
 really his own.
 
 The Soul, once domiciled within that Idea and brought to
 likeness with it, becomes productive, active; what it always held by
 its primary nature it now grasps with knowledge and applies in deed,
 so becoming, as it were, a new thing and, informed as it now 
 is by the
 purely intellectual, it sees [in its outgoing act] as a stranger
 looking upon a strange world. It was, no doubt, essentially a
 Reason-Principle, even an Intellectual Principle; but its function
 is to see a [lower] realm which these do not see.
 
 For, it is a not a complete thing: it has a lack; it is 
 incomplete
 in regard to its Prior; yet it, also, has a tranquil vision 
 of what it
 produces. What it has once brought into being it produces no 
 more, for
 all its productiveness is determined by this lack: it 
 produces for the
 purpose of Contemplation, in the desire of knowing all its content:
 when there is question of practical things it adapts its content to
 the outside order.
 
 The Soul has a greater content than Nature has and 
 therefore it is
 more tranquil; it is more nearly complete and therefore more
 contemplative. It is, however, not perfect, and is all the more
 eager to penetrate the object of contemplation, and it seeks the
 vision that comes by observation. It leaves its native realm and
 busies itself elsewhere; then it returns, and it possesses its
 vision by means of that phase of itself from which it had parted.
 The self-indwelling Soul inclines less to such experiences.
 
 The Sage, then, is the man made over into a Reason-Principle: to
 others he shows his act but in himself he is Vision: such a man is
 already set, not merely in regard to exterior things but also within
 himself, towards what is one and at rest: all his faculty 
 and life are
 inward-bent.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Certain Principles, then, we may take to be established- some
 self-evident, others brought out by our treatment above:
 
 All the forms of Authentic Existence spring from vision and are
 a vision. Everything that springs from these Authentic Existences in
 their vision is an object of vision-manifest to sensation or to true
 knowledge or to surface-awareness. All act aims at this knowing; all
 impulse is towards knowledge, all that springs from vision exists to
 produce Ideal-Form, that is a fresh object of vision, so that
 universally, as images of their engendering principles, they all
 produce objects of vision, Ideal-forms. In the engendering of these
 sub-existences, imitations of the Authentic, it is made manifest
 that the creating powers operate not for the sake of creation and
 action but in order to produce an object of vision. This same vision
 is the ultimate purpose of all the acts of the mind and, even
 further downward, of all sensation, since sensation also is an
 effort towards knowledge; lower still, Nature, producing 
 similarly its
 subsequent principle, brings into being the vision and Idea that we
 know in it. It is certain, also, that as the Firsts exist in vision
 all other things must be straining towards the same condition; the
 starting point is, universally, the goal.
 
 When living things reproduce their Kind, it is that the
 Reason-Principles within stir them; the procreative act is the
 expression of a contemplation, a travail towards the creation of
 many forms, many objects of contemplation, so that the 
 universe may be
 filled full with Reason-Principles and that contemplation may be, as
 nearly as possible, endless: to bring anything into being is to
 produce an Idea-Form and that again is to enrich the universe with
 contemplation: all the failures, alike in being and in doing, are
 but the swerving of visionaries from the object of vision: in the
 end the sorriest craftsman is still a maker of forms, 
 ungracefully. So
 Love, too, is vision with the pursuit of Ideal-Form.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. From this basis we proceed:
 
 In the advancing stages of Contemplation rising from that in
 Nature, to that in the Soul and thence again to that in the
 Intellectual-Principle itself- the object contemplated becomes
 progressively a more and more intimate possession of the 
 Contemplating
 Beings, more and more one thing with them; and in the advanced Soul
 the objects of knowledge, well on the way towards the
 Intellectual-Principle, are close to identity with their container.
 
 Hence we may conclude that, in the Intellectual-Principle
 Itself, there is complete identity of Knower and Known, and this not
 by way of domiciliation, as in the case of even the highest soul,
 but by Essence, by the fact that, there, no distinction 
 exists between
 Being and Knowing; we cannot stop at a principle containing separate
 parts; there must always be a yet higher, a principle above all such
 diversity.
 
 The Supreme must be an entity in which the two are one; it will,
 therefore, be a Seeing that lives, not an object of vision 
 like things
 existing in something other than themselves: what exists in 
 an outside
 element is some mode of living-thing; it is not the Self-Living.
 
 Now admitting the existence of a living thing that is at once a
 Thought and its object, it must be a Life distinct from the 
 vegetative
 or sensitive life or any other life determined by Soul.
 
 In a certain sense no doubt all lives are thoughts- but
 qualified as thought vegetative, thought sensitive and thought
 psychic.
 
 What, then, makes them thoughts?
 
 The fact that they are Reason-Principles. Every life is some
 form of thought, but of a dwindling clearness like the 
 degrees of life
 itself. The first and clearest Life and the first 
 Intelligence are one
 Being. The First Life, then, is an Intellection and the next form of
 Life is the next Intellection and the last form of Life is the last
 form of Intellection. Thus every Life, of the order strictly so
 called, is an Intellection.
 
 But while men may recognize grades in life they reject grade in
 thought; to them there are thoughts [full and perfect] and anything
 else is no thought.
 
 This is simply because they do not seek to establish 
 what Life is.
 
 The essential is to observe that, here again, all reasoning
 shows that whatever exists is a bye-work of visioning: if, then, the
 truest Life is such by virtue of an Intellection and is 
 identical with
 the truest Intellection, then the truest Intellection is a living
 being; Contemplation and its object constitute a living 
 thing, a Life,
 two inextricably one.
 
 The duality, thus, is a unity; but how is this unity also a
 plurality?
 
 The explanation is that in a unity there can be no seeing [a
 pure unity has no room for vision and an object]; and in its
 Contemplation the One is not acting as a Unity; if it were, the
 Intellectual-Principle cannot exist. The Highest began as a unity
 but did not remain as it began; all unknown to itself, it became
 manifold; it grew, as it were, pregnant: desiring universal
 possession, it flung itself outward, though it were better had it
 never known the desire by which a Secondary came into being: it is
 like a Circle [in the Idea] which in projection becomes a figure, a
 surface, a circumference, a centre, a system of radii, of upper and
 lower segments. The Whence is the better; the Whither is less good:
 the Whence is not the same as the Whence-followed-by-a-Whither; the
 Whence all alone is greater than with the Whither added to it.
 
 The Intellectual-Principle on the other hand was never merely
 the Principle of an inviolable unity; it was a universal as well
 and, being so, was the Intellectual-Principle of all things. Being,
 thus, all things and the Principle of all, it must 
 essentially include
 this part of itself [this element-of-plurality] which is 
 universal and
 is all things: otherwise, it contains a part which is not
 Intellectual-Principle: it will be a juxtaposition of
 non-Intellectuals, a huddled heap waiting to be made over from the
 mass of things into the Intellectual-Principle!
 
 We conclude that this Being is limitless and that, in all the
 outflow from it, there is no lessening either in its emanation,
 since this also is the entire universe, nor in itself, the starting
 point, since it is no assemblage of parts [to be diminished by any
 outgo].
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. Clearly a Being of this nature is not the primal existent;
 there must exist that which transcends it, that Being [the
 Absolute], to which all our discussion has been leading.
 
 In the first place, Plurality is later than Unity. The
 Intellectual-Principle is a number [= the expression of a
 plurality]; and number derives from unity: the source of a 
 number such
 as this must be the authentically One. Further, it is the sum of an
 Intellectual-Being with the object of its Intellection, so that it
 is a duality; and, given this duality, we must find what 
 exists before
 it.
 
 What is this?
 
 The Intellectual-Principle taken separately, perhaps?
 
 No: an Intellect is always inseparable from an intelligible
 object; eliminate the intelligible, and the Intellectual-Principle
 disappears with it. If, then, what we are seeking cannot be the
 Intellectual-Principle but must be something that rejects the
 duality there present, then the Prior demanded by that 
 duality must be
 something on the further side of the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 But might it not be the Intelligible object itself?
 
 No: for the Intelligible makes an equally inseparable 
 duality with
 the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 If, then, neither the Intellectual-Principle nor the
 Intelligible Object can be the First Existent, what is?
 
 Our answer can only be:
 
 The source of both.
 
 What will This be; under what character can we picture It?
 
 It must be either Intellective or without Intellection: if
 Intellective it is the Intellectual-Principle; if not, it will be
 without even knowledge of itself- so that, either way, what is there
 so august about it?
 
 If we define it as The Good and the wholly simplex, we will, no
 doubt, be telling the truth, but we will not be giving any 
 certain and
 lucid account of it as long as we have in mind no entity in which to
 lodge the conception by which we define it.
 
 Yet: our knowledge of everything else comes by way of our
 intelligence; our power is that of knowing the intelligible by means
 of the intelligence: but this Entity transcends all of the
 intellectual nature; by what direct intuition, then, can it 
 be brought
 within our grasp?
 
 To this question the answer is that we can know it only in the
 degree of human faculty: we indicate it by virtue of what in 
 ourselves
 is like it.
 
 For in us, also, there is something of that Being; nay, nothing,
 ripe for that participation, can be void of it.
 
 Wherever you be, you have only to range over against this
 omnipresent Being that in you which is capable of drawing 
 from It, and
 you have your share in it: imagine a voice sounding over a vast
 waste of land, and not only over the emptiness alone but over human
 beings; wherever you be in that great space you have but to 
 listen and
 you take the voice entire- entire though yet with a difference.
 
 And what do we take when we thus point the Intelligence?
 
 The Intellectual-Principle in us must mount to its origins:
 essentially a thing facing two ways, it must deliver itself over to
 those powers within it which tend upward; if it seeks the vision of
 that Being, it must become something more than Intellect.
 
 For the Intellectual-Principle is the earliest form of 
 Life: it is
 the Activity presiding over the outflowing of the universal 
 Order- the
 outflow, that is, of the first moment, not that of the continuous
 process.
 
 In its character as Life, as emanation, as containing all things
 in their precise forms and not merely in the agglomerate mass- for
 this would be to contain them imperfectly and inarticulately- it
 must of necessity derive from some other Being, from one 
 that does not
 emanate but is the Principle of Emanation, of Life, of Intellect and
 of the Universe.
 
 For the Universe is not a Principle and Source: it springs from
 a source, and that source cannot be the All or anything belonging to
 the All, since it is to generate the All, and must be not a
 plurality but the Source of plurality, since universally a begetting
 power is less complex than the begotten. Thus the Being that has
 engendered the Intellectual-Principle must be more simplex than the
 Intellectual-Principle.
 
 We may be told that this engendering Principle is the 
 One-and-All.
 
 But, at that, it must be either each separate entity from among
 all or it will be all things in the one mass.
 
 Now if it were the massed total of all, it must be of 
 later origin
 than any of the things of which it is the sum; if it precedes the
 total, it differs from the things that make up the total and 
 they from
 it: if it and the total of things constitute a co-existence, 
 it is not
 a Source. But what we are probing for must be a Source; it must
 exist before all, that all may be fashioned as sequel to it.
 
 As for the notion that it may be each separate entity of the
 All, this would make a self-Identity into a what you like, where you
 like, indifferently, and would, besides, abolish all distinction in
 things themselves.
 
 Once more we see that this can be no thing among things but must
 be prior to all things.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. And what will such a Principle essentially be?
 
 The potentiality of the Universe: the potentiality whose
 non-existence would mean the non-existence of all the Universe and
 even of the Intellectual-Principle which is the primal Life and all
 Life.
 
 This Principle on the thither side of Life is the cause of Life-
 for that Manifestation of Life which is the Universe of things is
 not the First Activity; it is itself poured forth, so to speak, like
 water from a spring.
 
 Imagine a spring that has no source outside itself; it gives
 itself to all the rivers, yet is never exhausted by what they take,
 but remains always integrally as it was; the tides that proceed from
 it are at one within it before they run their several ways, yet all,
 in some sense, know beforehand down what channels they will 
 pour their
 streams.
 
 Or: think of the Life coursing throughout some mighty tree while
 yet it is the stationary Principle of the whole, in no sense 
 scattered
 over all that extent but, as it were, vested in the root: it is the
 giver of the entire and manifold life of the tree, but 
 remains unmoved
 itself, not manifold but the Principle of that manifold life.
 
 And this surprises no one: though it is in fact astonishing how
 all that varied vitality springs from the unvarying, and how 
 that very
 manifoldness could not be unless before the multiplicity there were
 something all singleness; for, the Principle is not broken into
 parts to make the total; on the contrary, such partition 
 would destroy
 both; nothing would come into being if its cause, thus broken up,
 changed character.
 
 Thus we are always brought back to The One.
 
 Every particular thing has a One of its own to which it may be
 traced; the All has its One, its Prior but not yet the Absolute One;
 through this we reach that Absolute One, where all such reference
 comes to an end.
 
 Now when we reach a One- the stationary Principle- in 
 the tree, in
 the animal, in Soul, in the All- we have in every case the most
 powerful, the precious element: when we come to the One in the
 Authentically Existent Beings- their Principle and source and
 potentiality- shall we lose confidence and suspect it of
 being-nothing?
 
 Certainly this Absolute is none of the things of which it is the
 source- its nature is that nothing can be affirmed of it- not
 existence, not essence, not life- since it is That which transcends
 all these. But possess yourself of it by the very 
 elimination of Being
 and you hold a marvel. Thrusting forward to This, attaining, and
 resting in its content, seek to grasp it more and more-
 understanding it by that intuitive thrust alone, but knowing its
 greatness by the Beings that follow upon it and exist by its power.
 
 Another approach:
 
 The Intellectual-Principle is a Seeing, and a Seeing which
 itself sees; therefore it is a potentiality which has become
 effective.
 
 This implies the distinction of Matter and Form in it- as there
 must be in all actual seeing- the Matter in this case being the
 Intelligibles which the Intellectual-Principle contains and sees.
 All actual seeing implies duality; before the seeing takes 
 place there
 is the pure unity [of the power of seeing]. That unity [of
 principle] acquires duality [in the act of seeing], and the 
 duality is
 [always to be traced back to] a unity.
 
 Now as our sight requires the world of sense for its
 satisfaction and realization, so the vision in the
 Intellectual-Principle demands, for its completion, The Good.
 
 It cannot be, itself, The Good, since then it would not need to
 see or to perform any other Act; for The Good is the centre of all
 else, and it is by means of The Good that every thing has Act, while
 the Good is in need of nothing and therefore possesses nothing
 beyond itself.
 
 Once you have uttered "The Good," add no further thought: by any
 addition, and in proportion to that addition, you introduce a
 deficiency.
 
 Do not even say that it has Intellection; you would be dividing
 it; it would become a duality, Intellect and the Good. The 
 Good has no
 need of the Intellectual-Principle which, on the contrary, needs it,
 and, attaining it, is shaped into Goodness and becomes perfect by
 it: the Form thus received, sprung from the Good, brings it to
 likeness with the Good.
 
 Thus the traces of the Good discerned upon it must be taken as
 indication of the nature of that Archetype: we form a conception of
 its Authentic Being from its image playing upon the
 Intellectual-Principle. This image of itself, it has communicated to
 the Intellect that contemplates it: thus all the striving is on the
 side of the Intellect, which is the eternal striver and eternally
 the attainer. The Being beyond neither strives, since it feels no
 lack, nor attains, since it has no striving. And this marks it off
 from the Intellectual-Principle, to which characteristically belongs
 the striving, the concentrated strain towards its Form.
 
 Yet: The Intellectual-Principle; beautiful; the most beautiful
 of all; lying lapped in pure light and in clear radiance;
 circumscribing the Nature of the Authentic Existents; the original
 of which this beautiful world is a shadow and an image; tranquil in
 the fullness of glory since in it there is nothing devoid of
 intellect, nothing dark or out of rule; a living thing in a life of
 blessedness: this, too, must overwhelm with awe any that has seen
 it, and penetrated it, to become a unit of its Being.
 
 But: As one that looks up to the heavens and sees the 
 splendour of
 the stars thinks of the Maker and searches, so whoever has
 contemplated the Intellectual Universe and known it and wondered for
 it must search after its Maker too. What Being has raised so noble a
 fabric? And where? And how? Who has begotten such a child, this
 Intellectual-Principle, this lovely abundance so abundantly endowed?
 
 The Source of all this cannot be an Intellect; nor can it be an
 abundant power: it must have been before Intellect and 
 abundance were;
 these are later and things of lack; abundance had to be made
 abundant and Intellection needed to know.
 
 These are very near to the un-needing, to that which has no
 need of Knowing, they have abundance and intellection authentically,
 as being the first to possess. But, there is that before them which
 neither needs nor possesses anything, since, needing or possessing
 anything else, it would not be what it is- the Good.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 NINTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 DETACHED CONSIDERATIONS.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. "The Intellectual-Principle" [= the Divine Mind]- we read [in
 the Timaeus]- "looks upon the Ideas indwelling in that Being which
 is the Essentially Living [= according to Plotinus, the Intellectual
 Realm], "and then"- the text proceeds- "the Creator judged that all
 the content of that essentially living Being must find place in this
 lower universe also."
 
 Are we meant to gather that the Ideas came into being before the
 Intellectual-Principle so that it "sees them" as previously existent?
 
 The first step is to make sure whether the "Living Being" of the
 text is to be distinguished from the Intellectual-Principle 
 as another
 thing than it.
 
 It might be argued that the Intellectual-Principle is the
 Contemplator and therefore that the Living-Being contemplated is not
 the Intellectual-Principle but must be described as the Intellectual
 Object so that the Intellectual-Principle must possess the 
 Ideal realm
 as something outside of itself.
 
 But this would mean that it possesses images and not the
 realities, since the realities are in the Intellectual Realm which
 it contemplates: Reality- we read- is in the Authentic Existent
 which contains the essential form of particular things.
 
 No: even though the Intellectual-Principle and the Intellectual
 Object are distinct, they are not apart except for just that
 distinction.
 
 Nothing in the statement cited is inconsistent with the 
 conception
 that these two constitute one substance- though, in a unity, 
 admitting
 that distinction, of the intellectual act [as against passivity],
 without which there can be no question of an Intellectual-Principle
 and an Intellectual Object: what is meant is not that the
 contemplatory Being possesses its vision as in some other principle,
 but that it contains the Intellectual Realm within itself.
 
 The Intelligible Object is the Intellectual-Principle itself in
 its repose, unity, immobility: the Intellectual-Principle,
 contemplator of that object- of the Intellectual-Principle thus in
 repose is an active manifestation of the same Being, an Act which
 contemplates its unmoved phase and, as thus contemplating, stands as
 Intellectual-Principle to that of which it has the 
 intellection: it is
 Intellectual-Principle in virtue of having that intellection, and at
 the same time is Intellectual Object, by assimilation.
 
 This, then, is the Being which planned to create in the lower
 Universe what it saw existing in the Supreme, the four orders of
 living beings.
 
 No doubt the passage: [of the Timaeus] seems to imply 
 tacitly that
 this planning Principle is distinct from the other two: but 
 the three-
 the Essentially-Living, the Intellectual-Principle and this planning
 Principle will, to others, be manifestly one: the truth is that, by
 a common accident, a particular trend of thought has occasioned the
 discrimination.
 
 We have dealt with the first two; but the third- this Principle
 which decides to work upon the objects [the Ideas] 
 contemplated by the
 Intellectual-Principle within the Essentially-Living, to create
 them, to establish them in their partial existence- what is this
 third?
 
 It is possible that in one aspect the Intellectual-Principle is
 the principle of partial existence, while in another aspect 
 it is not.
 
 The entities thus particularized from the unity are products of
 the Intellectual-Principle which thus would be, to that extent, the
 separating agent. On the other hand it remains in itself, 
 indivisible;
 division begins with its offspring which, of course, means 
 with Souls:
 and thus a Soul- with its particular Souls- may be the separative
 principle.
 
 This is what is conveyed where we are told that the separation
 is the work of the third Principle and begins within the 
 Third: for to
 this Third belongs the discursive reasoning which is no function of
 the Intellectual-Principle but characteristic of its secondary, of
 Soul, to which precisely, divided by its own Kind, belongs the Act
 of division.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2.... For in any one science the reduction of the total of
 knowledge into its separate propositions does not shatter its unity,
 chipping it into unrelated fragments; in each distinct item is
 talent the entire body of the science, an integral thing in its
 highest Principle and its last detail: and similarly a man must so
 discipline himself that the first Principles of his Being 
 are also his
 completions, are totals, that all be pointed towards the loftiest
 phase of the Nature: when a man has become this unity in the best,
 he is in that other realm; for it is by this highest within himself,
 made his own, that he holds to the Supreme.
 
 At no point did the All-Soul come into Being: it never arrived,
 for it never knew place; what happens is that body, neighbouring
 with it, participates in it: hence Plato does not place Soul in body
 but body in Soul. The others, the secondary Souls, have a point of
 departure- they come from the All-Soul- and they have a Place into
 which to descend and in which to change to and fro, a place,
 therefore, from which to ascend: but this All-Soul is for ever
 Above, resting in that Being in which it holds its existence as Soul
 and followed, as next, by the Universe or, at least, by all beneath
 the sun.
 
 The partial Soul is illuminated by moving towards the Soul above
 it; for on that path it meets Authentic Existence. Movement towards
 the lower is towards non-Being: and this is the step it takes when
 it is set on self; for by willing towards itself it produces its
 lower, an image of itself- a non-Being- and so is wandering, as it
 were, into the void, stripping itself of its own determined form.
 And this image, this undetermined thing, is blank darkness, for it
 is utterly without reason, untouched by the Intellectual-Principle,
 far removed from Authentic Being.
 
 As long as it remains at the mid-stage it is in its own peculiar
 region; but when, by a sort of inferior orientation, it looks
 downward, it shapes that lower image and flings itself joyfully
 thither.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. (A)... How, then, does Unity give rise to Multiplicity?
 
 By its omnipresence: there is nowhere where it is not; it
 occupies, therefore, all that is; at once, it is manifold- 
 or, rather,
 it is all things.
 
 If it were simply and solely everywhere, all would be this one
 thing alone: but it is, also, in no place, and this gives, in the
 final result, that, while all exists by means of it, in virtue of
 its omnipresence, all is distinct from it in virtue of its being
 nowhere.
 
 But why is it not merely present everywhere but in addition
 nowhere-present?
 
 Because, universality demands a previous unity. It must,
 therefore, pervade all things and make all, but not be the universe
 which it makes.
 
 (B) The Soul itself must exist as Seeing- with the
 Intellectual-Principle as the object of its vision- it is 
 undetermined
 before it sees but is naturally apt to see: in other words, Soul is
 Matter to [its determinant] the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 (C) When we exercise intellection upon ourselves, we are,
 obviously, observing an intellective nature, for otherwise we would
 not be able to have that intellection.
 
 We know, and it is ourselves that we know; therefore we know the
 reality of a knowing nature: therefore, before that intellection in
 Act, there is another intellection, one at rest, so to speak.
 
 Similarly, that self-intellection is an act upon a reality and
 upon a life; therefore, before the Life and Real-Being concerned in
 the intellection, there must be another Being and Life. In a word,
 intellection is vested in the activities themselves: since, then,
 the activities of self-intellection are intellective-forms, We, the
 Authentic We, are the Intelligibles and self-intellection conveys
 the Image of the Intellectual Sphere.
 
 (D) The Primal is a potentiality of Movement and of 
 Repose- and so
 is above and beyond both- its next subsequent has rest and movement
 about the Primal. Now this subsequent is the Intellectual-Principle-
 so characterized by having intellection of something not identical
 with itself whereas the Primal is without intellection. A knowing
 principle has duality [that entailed by being the knower of 
 something)
 and, moreover, it knows itself as deficient since its virtue
 consists in this knowing and not in its own bare Being.
 
 (E) In the case of everything which has developed from 
 possibility
 to actuality the actual is that which remains self-identical for its
 entire duration- and this it is which makes perfection possible even
 in things of the corporeal order, as for instance in fire but the
 actual of this kind cannot be everlasting since [by the fact of
 their having once existed only in potentiality] Matter has its place
 in them. In anything, on the contrary, not composite [= never
 touched by Matter or potentiality] and possessing actuality, that
 actual existence is eternal... There is, however, the case, also in
 which a thing, itself existing in actuality, stands as 
 potentiality to
 some other form of Being.
 
 (F)... But the First is not to be envisaged as made up from Gods
 of a transcendent order: no; the Authentic Existents constitute the
 Intellectual-Principle with Which motion and rest begin. The Primal
 touches nothing, but is the centre round which those other Beings
 lie in repose and in movement. For Movement is aiming, and the
 Primal aims at nothing; what could the Summit aspire to?
 
 Has It, even, no Intellection of Itself?
 
 It possesses Itself and therefore is said in general 
 terms to know
 itself... But intellection does not mean self-ownership; it means
 turning the gaze towards the Primal: now the act of intellection is
 itself the Primal Act, and there is therefore no place for 
 any earlier
 one. The Being projecting this Act transcends the Act so that
 Intellection is secondary to the Being in which it resides.
 Intellection is not the transcendently venerable thing- neither
 Intellection in general nor even the Intellection of The Good. Apart
 from and over any Intellection stands The Good itself.
 
 The Good therefore needs no consciousness.
 
 What sort of consciousness can be conceived in it?
 
 Consciousness of the Good as existent or non-existent?
 
 If of existent Good, that Good exists before and without any
 such consciousness: if the act of consciousness produces that Good,
 then The Good was not previously in existence- and, at once, the
 very consciousness falls to the ground since it is, no longer
 consciousness of The Good.
 
 But would not all this mean that the First does not even live?
 
 The First cannot be said to live since it is the source of Life.
 
 All that has self-consciousness and self-intellection is
 derivative; it observes itself in order, by that activity, to become
 master of its Being: and if it study itself this can mean only that
 ignorance inheres in it and that it is of its own nature lacking and
 to be made perfect by Intellection.
 
 All thinking and knowing must, here, be eliminated: the addition
 introduces deprivation and deficiency.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THE FOURTH ENNEAD
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIRST TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON THE ESSENCE OF THE SOUL (1).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. In the Intellectual Kosmos dwells Authentic Essence, with the
 Intellectual-Principle [Divine Mind] as the noblest of its content,
 but containing also souls, since every soul in this lower sphere has
 come thence: that is the world of unembodied spirits while to our
 world belong those that have entered body and undergone bodily
 division.
 
 There the Intellectual-Principle is a concentrated all- 
 nothing of
 it distinguished or divided- and in that kosmos of unity all 
 souls are
 concentrated also, with no spatial discrimination.
 
 But there is a difference:
 
 The Intellectual-Principle is for ever repugnant to distinction
 and to partition. Soul, there without distinction and partition, has
 yet a nature lending itself to divisional existence: its division is
 secession, entry into body.
 
 In view of this seceding and the ensuing partition we may
 legitimately speak of it as a partible thing.
 
 But if so, how can it still be described as indivisible?
 
 In that the secession is not of the soul entire; something of it
 holds its ground, that in it which recoils from separate existence.
 
 The entity, therefore, described as "consisting of the undivided
 soul and of the soul divided among bodies," contains a soul which is
 at once above and below, attached to the Supreme and yet 
 reaching down
 to this sphere, like a radius from a centre.
 
 Thus it is that, entering this realm, it possesses still the
 vision inherent to that superior phase in virtue of which it
 unchangingly maintains its integral nature. Even here it is not
 exclusively the partible soul: it is still the impartible as well:
 what in it knows partition is parted without partibility; 
 undivided as
 giving itself to the entire body, a whole to a whole, it is 
 divided as
 being effective in every part.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SECOND TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON THE ESSENCE OF THE SOUL (2).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. In our attempt to elucidate the Essence of the soul, 
 we show it
 to be neither a material fabric nor, among immaterial things, a
 harmony. The theory that it is some final development, some
 entelechy, we pass by, holding this to be neither true as presented
 nor practically definitive.
 
 No doubt we make a very positive statement about it when we
 declare it to belong to the Intellectual Kind, to be of the divine
 order; but a deeper penetration of its nature is demanded.
 
 In that allocation we were distinguishing things as they fall
 under the Intellectual or the sensible, and we placed the soul in
 the former class; now, taking its membership of the Intellectual for
 granted, we must investigate by another path the more specific
 characteristics of its nature.
 
 There are, we hold, things primarily apt to partition, tending
 by sheer nature towards separate existence: they are things in which
 no part is identical either with another part or with the whole,
 while, also their part is necessarily less than the total and whole:
 these are magnitudes of the realm of sense, masses, each of which
 has a station of its own so that none can be identically present in
 entirety at more than one point at one time.
 
 But to that order is opposed Essence [Real-Being]; this is in no
 degree susceptible of partition; it is unparted and impartible;
 interval is foreign to it, cannot enter into our idea of it: 
 it has no
 need of place and is not, in diffusion or as an entirety, situated
 within any other being: it is poised over all beings at 
 once, and this
 is not in the sense of using them as a base but in their 
 being neither
 capable nor desirous of existing independently of it; it is 
 an essence
 eternally unvaried: it is common to all that follows upon it: it is
 like the circle's centre to which all the radii are attached while
 leaving it unbrokenly in possession of itself, the starting point of
 their course and of their essential being, the ground in which they
 all participate: thus the indivisible is the principle of these
 divided existences and in their very outgoing they remain enduringly
 in contact with that stationary essence.
 
 So far we have the primarily indivisible- supreme among the
 Intellectual and Authentically Existent- and we have its 
 contrary, the
 Kind definitely divisible in things of sense; but there is also
 another Kind, of earlier rank than the sensible yet near to it and
 resident within it- an order, not, like body, primarily a thing of
 part, but becoming so upon incorporation. The bodies are 
 separate, and
 the ideal form which enters them is correspondingly sundered while,
 still, it is present as one whole in each of its severed parts,
 since amid that multiplicity in which complete individuality has
 entailed complete partition, there is a permanent identity; we may
 think of colour, qualities of all kinds, some particular shape,
 which can be present in many unrelated objects at the one 
 moment, each
 entire and yet with no community of experience among the various
 manifestations. In the case of such ideal-forms we may 
 affirm complete
 partibility.
 
 But, on the other hand, that first utterly indivisible Kind must
 be accompanied by a subsequent Essence, engendered by it and holding
 indivisibility from it but, in virtue of the necessary outgo from
 source, tending firmly towards the contrary, the wholly 
 partible; this
 secondary Essence will take an intermediate Place between the first
 substance, the undivided, and that which is divisible in material
 things and resides in them. Its presence, however, will differ in
 one respect from that of colour and quantity; these, no doubt, are
 present identically and entire throughout diverse material 
 masses, but
 each several manifestation of them is as distinct from every other
 as the mass is from the mass.
 
 The magnitude present in any mass is definitely one 
 thing, yet its
 identity from part to part does not imply any such community as
 would entail common experience; within that identity there is
 diversity, for it is a condition only, not the actual Essence.
 
 The Essence, very near to the impartible, which we assert to
 belong to the Kind we are now dealing with, is at once an Essence
 and an entrant into body; upon embodiment, it experiences a
 partition unknown before it thus bestowed itself.
 
 In whatsoever bodies it occupies- even the vastest of 
 all, that in
 which the entire universe is included- it gives itself to the whole
 without abdicating its unity.
 
 This unity of an Essence is not like that of body, which 
 is a unit
 by the mode of continuous extension, the mode of distinct parts each
 occupying its own space. Nor is it such a unity as we have dealt
 with in the case of quality.
 
 The nature, at once divisible and indivisible, which we affirm
 to be soul has not the unity of an extended thing: it does 
 not consist
 of separate sections; its divisibility lies in its presence at every
 point of the recipient, but it is indivisible as dwelling entire in
 the total and entire in any part.
 
 To have penetrated this idea is to know the greatness of the
 soul and its power, the divinity and wonder of its being, as a
 nature transcending the sphere of Things.
 
 Itself devoid of mass, it is present to all mass: it exists here
 and yet is There, and this not in distinct phases but with
 unsundered identity: thus it is "parted and not parted," or, better,
 it has never known partition, never become a parted thing, 
 but remains
 a self-gathered integral, and is "parted among bodies" merely in the
 sense that bodies, in virtue of their own sundered existence, cannot
 receive it unless in some partitive mode; the partition, in other
 words, is an occurrence in body not in soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. It can be demonstrated that soul must, necessarily, be of
 just this nature and that there can be no other soul than such a
 being, one neither wholly partible but both at once.
 
 If it had the nature of body it would consist of isolated
 members each unaware of the conditions of every other; there would
 be a particular soul- say a soul of the finger- answering as a
 distinct and independent entity to every local experience; in
 general terms, there would be a multiplicity of souls administering
 each individual; and, moreover, the universe would be governed not
 by one soul but by an incalculable number, each standing apart to
 itself. But, without a dominant unity, continuity is meaningless.
 
 The theory that "Impressions reach the leading-principle by
 progressive stages" must be dismissed as mere illusion.
 
 In the first place, it affirms without investigation a "leading"
 phase of the soul.
 
 What can justify this assigning of parts to the soul, the
 distinguishing one part from another? What quantity, or what
 difference of quality, can apply to a thing defined as a
 self-consistent whole of unbroken unity?
 
 Again, would perception be vested in that leading 
 principle alone,
 or in the other phases as well?
 
 If a given experience bears only on that "leading principle," it
 would not be felt as lodged in any particular members of the 
 organism;
 if, on the other hand, it fastens on some other phase of the 
 soul- one
 not constituted for sensation- that phase cannot transmit any
 experience to the leading principle, and there can be no sensation.
 
 Again, suppose sensation vested in the 
 "leading-principle" itself:
 then, a first alternative, it will be felt in some one part of that
 [some specifically sensitive phase], the other part excluding a
 perception which could serve no purpose; or, in the second
 alternative, there will be many distinct sensitive phases, 
 an infinite
 number, with difference from one to another. In that second case,
 one sensitive phase will declare "I had this sensation primarily";
 others will have to say "I felt the sensation that rose elsewhere";
 but either the site of the experience will be a matter of doubt to
 every phase except the first, or each of the parts of the 
 soul will be
 deceived into allocating the occurrence within its own particular
 sphere.
 
 If, on the contrary, the sensation is vested not merely in the
 "leading principle," but in any and every part of the soul, what
 special function raises the one rather than the other into that
 leading rank, or why is the sensation to be referred to it 
 rather than
 elsewhere? And how, at this, account for the unity of the knowledge
 brought in by diverse senses, by eyes, by ears?
 
 On the other hand, if the soul is a perfect unity- 
 utterly strange
 to part, a self-gathered whole- if it continuously eludes 
 all touch of
 multiplicity and divisibility- then, no whole taken up into it can
 ever be ensouled; soul will stand as circle-centre to every object
 [remote on the circumference], and the entire mass of a living being
 is soulless still.
 
 There is, therefore, no escape: soul is, in the degree
 indicated, one and many, parted and impartible. We cannot 
 question the
 possibility of a thing being at once a unity and multi-present,
 since to deny this would be to abolish the principle which sustains
 and administers the universe; there must be a Kind which 
 encircles and
 supports all and conducts all with wisdom, a principle which is
 multiple since existence is multiple, and yet is one soul 
 always since
 a container must be a unity: by the multiple unity of its nature, it
 will furnish life to the multiplicity of the series of an all; by
 its impartible unity, it will conduct a total to wise ends.
 
 In the case of things not endowed with intelligence, the
 "leading-principle" is their mere unity- a lower reproduction of the
 soul's efficiency.
 
 This is the deeper meaning of the profound passage [in the
 Timaeus], where we read "By blending the impartible, eternally
 unchanging essence with that in division among bodies, he produced a
 third form of essence partaking of both qualities."
 
 Soul, therefore, is, in this definite sense, one and many; the
 Ideal-Form resident in body is many and one; bodies themselves are
 exclusively many; the Supreme is exclusively one.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THIRD TRACTATE.
 
 
 PROBLEMS OF THE SOUL (1).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. The soul: what dubious questions concerning it admit of
 solution, or where we must abide our doubt- with, at least, the gain
 of recognizing the problem that confronts us- this is matter well
 worth attention. On what subject can we more reasonably expend the
 time required by minute discussion and investigation? Apart from
 much else, it is enough that such an enquiry illuminates two grave
 questions: of what sphere the soul is the principle, and whence the
 soul itself springs. Moreover, we will be only obeying the ordinance
 of the God who bade us know ourselves.
 
 Our general instinct to seek and learn, our longing to possess
 ourselves of whatsoever is lovely in the vision will, in all reason,
 set us enquiring into the nature of the instrument with which we
 search.
 
 Now even in the universal Intellect [Divine Mind] there was
 duality, so that we would expect differences of condition in 
 things of
 part: how some things rather than others come to be 
 receptacles of the
 divine beings will need to be examined; but all this we may leave
 aside until we are considering the mode in which soul comes to
 occupy body. For the moment we return to our argument against those
 who maintain our souls to be offshoots from the soul of the universe
 [parts and an identity modally parted].
 
 Our opponents will probably deny the validity of our arguments
 against the theory that the human soul is a mere segment of the
 All-Soul- the considerations, namely, that it is of identical scope,
 and that it is intellective in the same degree, supposing them,
 even, to admit that equality of intellection.
 
 They will object that parts must necessarily fall under one
 ideal-form with their wholes. And they will adduce Plato as 
 expressing
 their view where, in demonstrating that the All is ensouled, he says
 "As our body is a portion of the body of the All, so our soul is a
 portion of the soul of the All." It is admitted on clear 
 evidence that
 we are borne along by the Circuit of the All; we will be told that-
 taking character and destiny from it, strictly inbound with it- we
 must derive our souls, also, from what thus bears us up, and that as
 within ourselves every part absorbs from our soul so, analogically,
 we, standing as parts to the universe, absorb from the Soul 
 of the All
 as parts of it. They will urge also that the dictum "The collective
 soul cares for all the unensouled," carries the same implication and
 could be uttered only in the belief that nothing whatever of later
 origin stands outside the soul of the universe, the only soul there
 can be there to concern itself with the unensouled.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. To this our first answer is that to place certain things
 under one identical class- by admitting an identical range of
 operation- is to make them of one common species, and puts an end to
 all mention of part; the reasonable conclusion would be, on the
 contrary, that there is one identical soul, every separate
 manifestation being that soul complete.
 
 Our opponents after first admitting the unity go on to make our
 soul dependent on something else, something in which we have 
 no longer
 the soul of this or that, even of the universe, but a soul 
 of nowhere,
 a soul belonging neither to the kosmos, nor to anything else, and
 yet vested with all the function inherent to the kosmic soul and to
 that of every ensouled thing.
 
 The soul considered as an entirety cannot be a soul of any one
 given thing- since it is an Essence [a divine Real-Being]- or, at
 least, there must be a soul which is not exclusively the soul of any
 particular thing, and those attached to particulars must so belong
 merely in some mode of accident.
 
 In such questions as this it is important to clarify the
 significance of "part."
 
 Part, as understood of body- uniform or varied- need not detain
 us; it is enough to indicate that, when part is mentioned in respect
 of things whose members are alike, it refers to mass and not to
 ideal-form [specific idea]: take for example, whiteness: the 
 whiteness
 in a portion of milk is not a part of the whiteness of milk in
 general: we have the whiteness of a portion not a portion of
 whiteness; for whiteness is utterly without magnitude; has nothing
 whatever to do with quantity.
 
 That is all we need say with regard to part in material things;
 but part in the unembodied may be taken in various ways. We may
 think of it in the sense familiar in numbers, "two" a part of the
 standard "ten"- in abstract numbers of course- or as we think of a
 segment of a circle, or line [abstractly considered], or, again, of
 a section or branch of knowledge.
 
 In the case of the units of reckoning and of geometrical figure,
 exactly as in that of corporeal masses, partition must diminish the
 total; the part must be less than the whole; for these are things of
 quantity, and have their being as things of quantity; and- since
 they are not the ideal-form Quantity- they are subject to 
 increase and
 decrease.
 
 Now in such a sense as this, part cannot be affirmed of the soul.
 
 The soul is not a thing of quantity; we are not to 
 conceive of the
 All-Soul as some standard ten with particular souls as its 
 constituent
 units.
 
 Such a conception would entail many absurdities:
 
 The Ten could not be [essentially] a unity [the Soul would be an
 aggregation, not a self-standing Real-Being] and, further- unless
 every one of the single constituents were itself an All-Soul- the
 All-Soul would be formed of non-souls.
 
 Again, it is admitted that the particular soul- this "part of
 the All-Soul- is of one ideal-form with it, but this does not entail
 the relation of part to whole, since in objects formed of continuous
 parts there is nothing inevitably making any portion uniform with
 the total: take, for example, the parts of a circle or square; we
 may divide it in different ways so as to get our part; a 
 triangle need
 not be divided into triangles; all sorts of different figures are
 possible: yet an absolute uniformity is admitted to reign throughout
 soul.
 
 In a line, no doubt, the part is inevitably a line; but even
 here there is a necessary difference in size; and if, in the case of
 the soul we similarly called upon magnitude as the 
 distinction between
 constituents and collective soul, then soul, thus classed by 
 magnitude
 becomes quantitative, and is simply body.
 
 But it is admitted that all souls are alike and are entireties;
 clearly, soul is not subject to part in the sense in which
 magnitudes are: our opponents themselves would not consent to the
 notion of the All-Soul being whittled down into fragments, 
 yet this is
 what they would be doing, annulling the All-Soul- if any collective
 soul existed at all- making it a mere piece of terminology, thinking
 of it like wine separated into many portions, each portion, in its
 jar, being described as a portion of the total thing, wine.
 
 Next there is the conception of the individual soul as a part in
 the sense in which we speak of some single proposition as a part of
 the science entire.
 
 The theorem is separate, but the science stands as one undivided
 thing, the expression and summed efficiency [energy] of each
 constituent notion: this is partition without severance; each item
 potentially includes the whole science, which itself remains an
 unbroken total.
 
 Is this the appropriate parallel?
 
 No; in such a relationship the All-Soul, of which the particular
 souls are to be a part, would not be the soul of any definite thing,
 but an entity standing aloof; that means that it would not 
 even be the
 soul of the Kosmos; it would, in fact, be, itself, one of those
 partial souls; thus all alike would be partial and of one 
 nature; and,
 at that, there would be no reason for making any such distinction.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Is it a question of part in the sense that, taking one living
 being, the soul in a finger might be called a part of the 
 soul entire?
 
 This would carry the alternative that either there is no soul
 outside of body, or that- no soul being within body- the thing
 described as the soul of the universe is, none the less, outside the
 body of the universe. That is a point to be investigated, but for
 the present we must consider what kind of soul this parallel would
 give us.
 
 If the particular soul is a part of the All-Soul only in 
 the sense
 that this bestows itself upon all living things of the 
 partial sphere,
 such a self-bestowal does not imply division; on the contrary, it is
 the identical soul that is present everywhere, the one 
 complete thing,
 multi-present at the one moment: there is no longer question 
 of a soul
 that is a part against a soul that is an all- especially where an
 identical power is present. Even difference of function, as in eyes
 and ears, cannot warrant the assertion of distinct parts concerned
 in each separate act- with other parts again making allotment of
 faculty- all is met by the notion of one identical thing, but a
 thing in which a distinct power operates in each separate function.
 All the powers are present either in seeing or in hearing; the
 difference in impression received is due to the difference in the
 organs concerned; all the varying impressions are our various
 responses to Ideal-forms that can be taken in a variety of modes.
 
 A further proof [of the unity of Soul] is that perception
 demands a common gathering place; every organ has its distinct
 function, and is competent only upon its own material, and must
 interpret each several experience in its own fashion; the judgement
 upon these impressions must, then, be vested in some one principle,
 a judge informed upon all that is said and done.
 
 But again: "Everywhere, Unity": in the variety of functions if
 each "part of the soul" were as distinct as are the entrant
 sensations, none of those parts could have knowledge; awareness
 would belong only to that judging faculty- or, if local, every such
 act of awareness would stand quite unrelated to any other. But since
 the soul is a rational soul, by the very same title by which it is
 an All-Soul, and is called the rational soul, in the sense of being
 a whole [and so not merely "reasoning locally"], then what is
 thought of as a part must in reality be no part but the 
 identity of an
 unparted thing.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. But if this is the true account of the unity of soul, we must
 be able to meet the problems that ensue: firstly, the difficulty of
 one thing being present at the same moment in all things; and,
 secondly, the difficulty of soul in body as against soul not 
 embodied.
 
 We might be led to think that all soul must always inhabit body;
 this would seem especially plausible in the case of the soul of the
 universe, not thought of as ever leaving its body as the human soul
 does: there exists, no doubt, an opinion that even the human soul,
 while it must leave the body, cannot become an utterly disembodied
 thing; but assuming its complete disembodiment, how comes it that
 the human soul can go free of the body but the All-Soul not, though
 they are one and the same?
 
 There is no such difficulty in the case of the
 Intellectual-Principle; by the primal differentiation, this 
 separates,
 no doubt, into partial things of widely varying nature, but eternal
 unity is secured by virtue of the eternal identity of that 
 Essence: it
 is not so easy to explain how, in the case of the soul described as
 separate among bodies, such differentiated souls can remain 
 one thing.
 
 A possible solution may be offered:
 
 The unit soul holds aloof, not actually falling into body; the
 differentiated souls- the All-Soul, with the others- issue from the
 unity while still constituting, within certain limits, an 
 association.
 They are one soul by the fact that they do not belong unreservedly
 to any particular being; they meet, so to speak, fringe to fringe;
 they strike out here and there, but are held together at the source
 much as light is a divided thing upon earth, shining in this house,
 and that, and yet remains uninterruptedly one identical substance.
 
 The All-Soul would always remain above, since essentially it has
 nothing to do with descent or with the lower, or with any tendency
 towards this sphere: the other souls would become ours [become
 "partial," individual in us] because their lot is cast for this
 sphere, and because they are solicited by a thing [the body] which
 invites their care.
 
 The one- the lowest soul in the to the All-Soul- would correspond
 to that in some great growth, silently, unlaboriously conducting the
 whole; our own lowest soul might be compared to the insect life in
 some rotted part of the growth- for this is the ratio of the animated
 body to the universe- while the other soul in us, of one ideal nature
 with the higher parts of the All-Soul, may be imaged as the gardener
 concerned about the insects lodged in the tree and anxiously working
 to amend what is wrong; or we may contrast a healthy man living with
 the healthy and, by his thought or by his act, lending himself to the
 service of those about him, with, on the other side, a sick 
 man intent
 upon his own care and cure, and so living for the body, body-bound.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. But what place is left for the particular souls, 
 yours and mine
 and another's?
 
 May we suppose the Soul to be appropriated on the lower ranges
 to some individual, but to belong on the higher to that other sphere?
 
 At this there would be a Socrates as long as Socrates' soul
 remained in body; but Socrates ceases to exist, precisely on
 attainment of the highest.
 
 Now nothing of Real Being is ever annulled.
 
 In the Supreme, the Intellectual-Principles are not annulled,
 for in their differentiation there is no bodily partition, no
 passing of each separate phase into a distinct unity; every 
 such phase
 remains in full possession of that identical being. It is exactly so
 with the souls.
 
 By their succession they are linked to the several
 Intellectual-Principles, for they are the expression, the Logos, of
 the Intellectual-Principles, of which they are the unfolding;
 brevity has opened out to multiplicity; by that point of their being
 which least belongs to the partial order, they are attached each to
 its own Intellectual original: they have already chosen the way of
 division; but to the extreme they cannot go; thus they keep, at
 once, identification and difference; each soul is permanently a
 unity [a self] and yet all are, in their total, one being.
 
 Thus the gist of the matter is established: one soul the 
 source of
 all; those others, as a many founded in that one, are, on the
 analogy of the Intellectual-Principle, at once divided and
 undivided; that Soul which abides in the Supreme is the one 
 expression
 or Logos of the Intellectual-Principle, and from it spring other
 Reason-Principles, partial but immaterial, exactly as in the
 differentiation of the Supreme.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. But how comes it that while the All-Soul has produced 
 a kosmos,
 the soul of the particular has not, though it is of the one 
 ideal Kind
 and contains, it too, all things in itself?
 
 We have indicated that a thing may enter and dwell at the same
 time in various places; this ought to be explained, and the enquiry
 would show how an identity resident simultaneously here and 
 there may,
 in its separate appearances, act or react- or both- after distinct
 modes; but the matter deserves to be examined in a special 
 discussion.
 
 To return, then: how and why has the All-Soul produced a kosmos,
 while the particular souls simply administer some one part of it?
 
 In the first place, we are not surprised when men of identical
 knowledge differ greatly in effective power.
 
 But the reason, we will be asked.
 
 The answer might be that there is an even greater 
 difference among
 these souls, the one never having fallen away from the All-Soul, but
 dwelling within it and assuming body therein, while the others
 received their allotted spheres when the body was already in
 existence, when their sister soul was already in rule and, 
 as it were,
 had already prepared habitations for them. Again, the reason may be
 that the one [the creative All-Soul] looks towards the universal
 Intellectual-Principle [the exemplar of all that can be], while the
 others are more occupied with the Intellectual within 
 themselves, that
 which is already of the sphere of part; perhaps, too, these 
 also could
 have created, but that they were anticipated by that originator- the
 work accomplished before them- an impediment inevitable 
 whichsoever of
 the souls were first to operate.
 
 But it is safer to account for the creative act by nearer
 connection with the over-world; the souls whose tendency is
 exercised within the Supreme have the greater power; immune in that
 pure seat they create securely; for the greater power takes the
 least hurt from the material within which it operates; and this
 power remains enduringly attached to the over-world: it creates,
 therefore, self gathered and the created things gather round it; the
 other souls, on the contrary, themselves go forth; that can mean
 only that they have deserted towards the abyss; a main phase in them
 is drawn downward and pulls them with it in the desire towards the
 lower.
 
 The "secondary and tertiary souls," of which we hear, must be
 understood in the sense of closer or remoter position: it is much as
 in ourselves the relation to the Supreme is not identical 
 from soul to
 soul; some of us are capable of becoming Uniate, others of striving
 and almost attaining, while a third rank is much less apt; it is a
 matter of the degree or powers of the soul by which our expression
 is determined- the first degree dominant in the one person, the
 second, the third [the merely animal life] in others while, 
 still, all
 of us contain all the powers.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. So far, so good: but what of the passage in the Philebus
 taken to imply that the other souls are parts of the All-Soul?
 
 The statement there made does not bear the meaning read into it;
 it expresses only, what the author was then concerned with, that the
 heavens are ensouled- a teaching which he maintains in the 
 observation
 that it is preposterous to make the heavens soulless when we, who
 contain a part of the body of the All, have a soul; how, he asks,
 could there be soul in the part and none in the total.
 
 He makes his teaching quite clear in the Timaeus, where he shows
 us the other souls brought into existence after the All-Soul, but
 compounded from the same mixing bowl"; secondary and 
 tertiary are duly
 marked off from the primal but every form of soul is presented as
 being of identical ideal-nature with the All-Soul.
 
 As for saying of the Phaedrus. "All that is soul cares for all
 that is soulless," this simply tells us that the corporeal 
 kind cannot
 be controlled- fashioned, set in place or brought into being- by
 anything but the Soul. And we cannot think that there is one soul
 whose nature includes this power and another without it. "The
 perfect soul, that of the All," we read, "going its lofty journey,
 operates upon the kosmos not by sinking into it, but, as it were, by
 brooding over it"; and "every perfect soul exercises this 
 governance";
 he distinguishes the other, the soul in this sphere as "the soul
 when its wing is broken."
 
 As for our souls being entrained in the kosmic circuit, 
 and taking
 character and condition thence; this is no indication that they are
 parts: soul-nature may very well take some tincture from even the
 qualities of place, from water and from air; residence in 
 this city or
 in that, and the varying make-up of the body may have their
 influence [upon our human souls which, yet, are no parts of place or
 of body].
 
 We have always admitted that as members of the universe we take
 over something from the All-Soul; we do not deny the influence of
 the Kosmic Circuit; but against all this we oppose another soul in
 us [the Intellectual as distinguished from the merely vitalizing]
 proven to be distinct by that power of opposition.
 
 As for our being begotten children of the kosmos, we answer that
 in motherhood the entrant soul is distinct, is not the mother's.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. These considerations, amounting to the settlement of the
 question, are not countered by the phenomenon of sympathy; the
 response between soul and soul is due to the mere fact that 
 all spring
 from that self-same soul [the next to Divine Mind] from which
 springs the Soul of the All.
 
 We have already stated that the one soul is also multiple; and
 we have dealt with the different forms of relationship between part
 and whole: we have investigated the different degrees existing
 within soul; we may now add, briefly, that differences might be
 induced, also, by the bodies with which the soul has to do, and,
 even more, by the character and mental operations carried over from
 the conduct of the previous lives. "The life-choice made by 
 a soul has
 a correspondence"- we read- "with its former lives."
 
 As regards the nature of soul in general, the differences have
 been defined in the passage in which we mentioned the secondary and
 tertiary orders and laid down that, while all souls are
 all-comprehensive, each ranks according to its operative phase- one
 becoming Uniate in the achieved fact, another in knowledge, 
 another in
 desire, according to the distinct orientation by which each is, or
 tends to become, what it looks upon. The very fulfillment and
 perfectionment attainable by souls cannot but be different.
 
 But, if in the total the organization in which they have their
 being is compact of variety- as it must be since every
 Reason-Principle is a unity of multiplicity and variety, and may be
 thought of as a psychic animated organism having many shapes at its
 command- if this is so and all constitutes a system in which being
 is not cut adrift from being, if there is nothing chance- borne
 among beings as there is none even in bodily organisms, then it
 follows that Number must enter into the scheme; for, once 
 again, Being
 must be stable; the members of the Intellectual must possess 
 identity,
 each numerically one; this is the condition of individuality. Where,
 as in bodily masses, the Idea is not essentially native, and the
 individuality is therefore in flux, existence under ideal form can
 rise only out of imitation of the Authentic Existences; 
 these last, on
 the contrary, not rising out of any such conjunction [as the duality
 of Idea and dead Matter] have their being in that which is 
 numerically
 one, that which was from the beginning, and neither becomes what it
 has not been nor can cease to be what it is.
 
 Even supposing Real-Beings [such as soul] to be produced by some
 other principle, they are certainly not made from Matter; or, if
 they were, the creating principle must infuse into them, from within
 itself, something of the nature of Real-Being; but, at this, it
 would itself suffer change, as it created more or less. And, after
 all, why should it thus produce at any given moment rather 
 than remain
 for ever stationary?
 
 Moreover the produced total, variable from more to less, 
 could not
 be an eternal: yet the soul, it stands agreed, is eternal.
 
 But what becomes of the soul's infinity if it is thus fixed?
 
 The infinity is a matter of power: there is question, not of the
 soul's being divisible into an infinite number of parts, but of an
 infinite possible effectiveness: it is infinity in the sense in
 which the Supreme God, also, is free of all bound.
 
 This means that it is no external limit that defines the
 individual being or the extension of souls any more than of God; on
 the contrary each in right of its own power is all that it chooses
 to be: and we are not to think of it as going forth from itself
 [losing its unity by any partition]: the fact is simply that the
 element within it, which is apt to entrance into body, has the power
 of immediate projection any whither: the soul is certainly not
 wrenched asunder by its presence at once in foot and in finger. Its
 presence in the All is similarly unbroken; over its entire range it
 exists in every several part of everything having even vegetal life,
 even in a part cut off from the main; in any possible 
 segment it is as
 it is at its source. For the body of the All is a unit, and soul is
 everywhere present to it as to one thing.
 
 When some animal rots and a multitude of others spring from it,
 the Life-Principle now present is not the particular soul that was
 in the larger body; that body has ceased to be receptive of soul, or
 there would have been no death; what happens is that 
 whatsoever in the
 product of the decay is apt material for animal existence of one
 kind or another becomes ensouled by the fact that soul is nowhere
 lacking, though a recipient of soul may be. This new ensouling does
 not mean, however, an increase in the number of souls: all 
 depend from
 the one or, rather, all remains one: it is as with ourselves; some
 elements are shed, others grow in their place; the soul abandons the
 discarded and flows into the newcoming as long as the one soul of
 the man holds its ground; in the All the one soul holds its 
 ground for
 ever; its distinct contents now retain soul and now reject 
 it, but the
 total of spiritual beings is unaffected.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. But we must examine how soul comes to inhabit the body- the
 manner and the process- a question certainly of no minor interest.
 
 The entry of soul into body takes place under two forms.
 
 Firstly, there is the entry- metensomatosis- of a soul present
 in body by change from one [wholly material] frame to another or the
 entry- not known as metensomatosis, since the nature of the earlier
 habitacle is not certainly definable- of a soul leaving an aerial
 or fiery body for one of earth.
 
 Secondly, there is the entry from the wholly bodiless into any
 kind of body; this is the earliest form of any dealing between body
 and soul, and this entry especially demands investigation.
 
 What then can be thought to have happened when soul, 
 utterly clean
 from body, first comes into commerce with the bodily nature?
 
 It is reasonable, necessary even, to begin with the Soul of the
 All. Notice that if we are to explain and to be clear, we are
 obliged to use such words as "entry" and "ensoulment," though never
 was this All unensouled, never did body subsist with soul away,
 never was there Matter unelaborate; we separate, the better to
 understand; there is nothing illegitimate in the verbal and mental
 sundering of things which must in fact be co-existent.
 
 The true doctrine may be stated as follows:
 
 In the absence of body, soul could not have gone forth, since
 there is no other place to which its nature would allow it 
 to descend.
 Since go forth it must, it will generate a place for itself; at once
 body, also, exists.
 
 While the Soul [as an eternal, a Divine Being] is at 
 rest- in rest
 firmly based on Repose, the Absolute- yet, as we may put it, 
 that huge
 illumination of the Supreme pouring outwards comes at last to the
 extreme bourne of its light and dwindles to darkness; this darkness,
 now lying there beneath, the soul sees and by seeing brings to
 shape; for in the law of things this ultimate depth, 
 neighbouring with
 soul, may not go void of whatsoever degree of that 
 Reason-Principle it
 can absorb, the dimmed reason of reality at its faintest.
 
 Imagine that a stately and varied mansion has been built; it has
 never been abandoned by its Architect, who, yet, is not tied down to
 it; he has judged it worthy in all its length and breadth of all the
 care that can serve to its Being- as far as it can share in Being-
 or to its beauty, but a care without burden to its director, 
 who never
 descends, but presides over it from above: this gives the degree in
 which the kosmos is ensouled, not by a soul belonging to it, but by
 one present to it; it is mastered not master; not possessor but
 possessed. The soul bears it up, and it lies within, no 
 fragment of it
 unsharing.
 
 The kosmos is like a net which takes all its life, as far as
 ever it stretches, from being wet in the water, and has no act of
 its own; the sea rolls away and the net with it, precisely 
 to the full
 of its scope, for no mesh of it can strain beyond its set place: the
 soul is of so far-reaching a nature- a thing unbounded- as to
 embrace the entire body of the All in the one extension; so 
 far as the
 universe extends, there soul is; and if the universe had no 
 existence,
 the extent of soul would be the same; it is eternally what it is.
 The universe spreads as broad as the presence of soul; the bound of
 its expansion is the point at which, in its downward egression from
 the Supreme, it still has soul to bind it in one: it is a shadow as
 broad as the Reason-Principle proceeding from soul; and that
 Reason-Principle is of scope to generate a kosmic bulk as vast as
 lay in the purposes of the Idea [the Divine forming power] which it
 conveys.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. In view of all this we must now work back from the items to
 the unit, and consider the entire scheme as one enduring thing.
 
 We ascend from air, light, sun- or, moon and light and sun- in
 detail, to these things as constituting a total- though a total of
 degrees, primary, secondary, tertiary. Thence we come to the
 [kosmic] Soul, always the one undiscriminated entity. At 
 this point in
 our survey we have before us the over-world and all that follows
 upon it. That suite [the lower and material world] we take to be the
 very last effect that has penetrated to its furthest reach.
 
 Our knowledge of the first is gained from the ultimate of all,
 from the very shadow cast by the fire, because this ultimate [the
 material world] itself receives its share of the general light,
 something of the nature of the Forming-Idea hovering over the
 outcast that at first lay in blank obscurity. It is brought under
 the scheme of reason by the efficacy of soul whose entire extension
 latently holds this rationalizing power. As we know, the
 Reason-Principles carried in animal seed fashion and shape living
 beings into so many universes in the small. For whatsoever touches
 soul is moulded to the nature of soul's own Real-Being.
 
 We are not to think that the Soul acts upon the object by
 conformity to any external judgement; there is no pause for 
 willing or
 planning: any such procedure would not be an act of sheer nature,
 but one of applied art: but art is of later origin than 
 soul; it is an
 imitator, producing dim and feeble copies- toys, things of no great
 worth- and it is dependent upon all sorts of mechanism by which
 alone its images can be produced. The soul, on the contrary, is
 sovereign over material things by might of Real-Being; their quality
 is determined by its lead, and those elementary things cannot stand
 against its will. On the later level, things are hindered one by the
 other, and thus often fall short of the characteristic shape at
 which their unextended Reason-Principle must be aiming; in that
 other world [under the soul but above the material] the entire shape
 [as well as the idea] comes from soul, and all that is produced
 takes and keeps its appointed place in a unity, so that the 
 engendered
 thing, without labour as without clash, becomes all that it 
 should be.
 In that world the soul has elaborated its creation, the images of
 the gods, dwellings for men, each existing to some peculiar purpose.
 
 Soul could produce none but the things which truly represent its
 powers: fire produces warmth; another source produces cold; 
 soul has a
 double efficacy, its act within itself, and its act from within
 outwards towards the new production.
 
 In soulless entities, the outgo [natural to everything] remains
 dormant, and any efficiency they have is to bring to their own
 likeness whatever is amenable to their act. All existence has this
 tendency to bring other things to likeness; but the soul has the
 distinction of possessing at once an action of conscious attention
 within itself, and an action towards the outer. It has thus the
 function of giving life to all that does not live by prior right,
 and the life it gives is commensurate with its own; that is to say,
 living in reason, it communicates reason to the body- an image of
 the reason within itself, just as the life given to the body is an
 image of Real-Being- and it bestows, also, upon that material the
 appropriate shapes of which it contains the Reason-Forms.
 
 The content of the creative soul includes the Ideal 
 shapes of gods
 and of all else: and hence it is that the kosmos contains all.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. I think, therefore, that those ancient sages, who sought to
 secure the presence of divine beings by the erection of shrines and
 statues, showed insight into the nature of the All; they perceived
 that, though this Soul is everywhere tractable, its presence will be
 secured all the more readily when an appropriate receptacle is
 elaborated, a place especially capable of receiving some portion or
 phase of it, something reproducing it, or representing it, 
 and serving
 like a mirror to catch an image of it.
 
 It belongs to the nature of the All to make its entire content
 reproduce, most felicitously, the Reason-Principles in which it
 participates; every particular thing is the image within matter of a
 Reason-Principle which itself images a pre-material
 Reason-Principle: thus every particular entity is linked to that
 Divine Being in whose likeness it is made, the divine principle
 which the soul contemplated and contained in the act of each 
 creation.
 Such mediation and representation there must have been since it was
 equally impossible for the created to be without share in 
 the Supreme,
 and for the Supreme to descend into the created.
 
 The Intellectual-Principle in the Supreme has ever been 
 the sun of
 that sphere- let us accept that as the type of the creative 
 Logos- and
 immediately upon it follows the Soul depending from it, stationary
 Soul from stationary Intelligence. But the Soul borders also upon
 the sun of this sphere, and it becomes the medium by which all is
 linked to the overworld; it plays the part of an interpreter
 between what emanates from that sphere down to this lower universe,
 and what rises- as far as, through soul, anything can- from the
 lower to the highest.
 
 Nothing, in fact, is far away from anything; things are not
 remote: there is, no doubt, the aloofness of difference and 
 of mingled
 natures as against the unmingled; but selfhood has nothing to do
 with spatial position, and in unity itself there may still be
 distinction.
 
 These Beings [the Reason-Principles of this sphere] are divine
 in virtue of cleaving to the Supreme, because, by the medium of the
 Soul thought of as descending they remain linked with the 
 Primal Soul,
 and through it are veritably what they are called and possess the
 vision of the Intellectual Principle, the single object of
 contemplation to that soul in which they have their being.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. The souls of men, seeing their images in the mirror of
 Dionysus as it were, have entered into that realm in a leap downward
 from the Supreme: yet even they are not cut off from their origin,
 from the divine Intellect; it is not that they have come bringing
 the Intellectual Principle down in their fall; it is that though
 they have descended even to earth, yet their higher part holds for
 ever above the heavens.
 
 Their initial descent is deepened since that mid-part of 
 theirs is
 compelled to labour in care of the care-needing thing into which
 they have entered. But Zeus, the father, takes pity on their 
 toils and
 makes the bonds in which they labour soluble by death and gives
 respite in due time, freeing them from the body, that they too may
 come to dwell there where the Universal Soul, unconcerned 
 with earthly
 needs, has ever dwelt.
 
 For the container of the total of things must be a
 self-sufficing entity and remain so: in its periods it is wrought
 out to purpose under its Reason-Principles which are 
 perdurably valid;
 by these periods it reverts unfailingly, in the measured stages of
 defined life-duration, to its established character; it is 
 leading the
 things of this realm to be of one voice and plan with the 
 Supreme. And
 thus the kosmic content is carried forward to its purpose,
 everything in its co-ordinate place, under one only Reason-Principle
 operating alike in the descent and return of souls and to every
 purpose of the system.
 
 We may know this also by the concordance of the Souls with the
 ordered scheme of the kosmos; they are not independent, but, by
 their descent, they have put themselves in contact, and they stand
 henceforth in harmonious association with kosmic circuit- to the
 extent that their fortunes, their life experiences, their 
 choosing and
 refusing, are announced by the patterns of the stars- and out of
 this concordance rises as it were one musical utterance: the music,
 the harmony, by which all is described is the best witness to this
 truth.
 
 Such a consonance can have been procured in one only way:
 
 The All must, in every detail of act and experience, be an
 expression of the Supreme, which must dominate alike its periods and
 its stable ordering and the life-careers varying with the movement
 of the souls as they are sometimes absorbed in that highest, 
 sometimes
 in the heavens, sometimes turned to the things and places of our
 earth. All that is Divine Intellect will rest eternally above, and
 could never fall from its sphere but, poised entire in its own high
 place, will communicate to things here through the channel of Soul.
 Soul in virtue of neighbourhood is more closely modelled 
 upon the Idea
 uttered by the Divine Intellect, and thus is able to produce order
 in the movement of the lower realm, one phase [the World-Soul]
 maintaining the unvarying march [of the kosmic circuit] the 
 other [the
 soul of the Individual] adopting itself to times and season.
 
 The depth of the descent, also, will differ- sometimes lower,
 sometimes less low- and this even in its entry into any given Kind:
 all that is fixed is that each several soul descends to a recipient
 indicated by affinity of condition; it moves towards the thing which
 it There resembled, and enters, accordingly, into the body of man or
 animal.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. The Ineluctable, the Kosmic Law is, thus, rooted in a
 natural principle under which each several entity is overruled to
 go, duly and in order, towards that place and Kind to which it
 characteristically tends, that is towards the image of its primal
 choice and constitution.
 
 In that archetypal world every form of soul is near to the image
 [the thing in the world of copy] to which its individual
 constitution inclines it; there is therefore no need of a sender or
 leader acting at the right moment to bring it at the right moment
 whether into body or into a definitely appropriate body: of its own
 motion it descends at the precisely true time and enters where it
 must. To every Soul its own hour; when that strikes it descends and
 enters the body suitable to it as at the cry of a herald; thus all
 is set stirring and advancing as by a magician's power or by some
 mighty traction; it is much as, in any living thing, the soul itself
 effects the fulfillment of the natural career, stirring and bringing
 forth, in due season, every element- beard, horn, and all the
 successive stages of tendency and of output- or, as it leads a tree
 through its normal course within set periods.
 
 The Souls go forth neither under compulsion nor of freewill; or,
 at least, freedom, here, is not to be regarded as action upon
 preference; it is more like such a leap of the nature as moves men
 to the instinctive desire of sexual union, or, in the case 
 of some, to
 fine conduct; the motive lies elsewhere than in the reason: like is
 destined unfailingly to like, and each moves hither or thither at
 its fixed moment.
 
 Even the Intellectual-Principle, which is before all the kosmos,
 has, it also, its destiny, that of abiding intact above, and 
 of giving
 downwards: what it sends down is the particular whose existence is
 implied in the law of the universal; for the universal broods
 closely over the particular; it is not from without that the law
 derives the power by which it is executed; on the contrary the law
 is given in the entities upon whom it falls; these bear it about
 with them. Let but the moment arrive, and what it decrees will be
 brought to act by those beings in whom it resides; they fulfil it
 because they contain it; it prevails because it is within them; it
 becomes like a heavy burden, and sets up in them a painful longing
 to enter the realm to which they are bidden from within.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. Thus it comes about that this kosmos, lit with many lights,
 gleaming in its souls, receives still further graces, gifts from
 here and from there, from the gods of the Supreme, and from those
 other Intellectual-Principles whose nature it is to ensoul. This is
 probably the secret of the myth in which, after Prometheus 
 had moulded
 woman, the other gods heaped gifts upon her, Hephaistos "blending
 the clay with moisture and bestowing the human voice and the 
 form of a
 goddess"; Aphrodite bringing her gifts, and the Graces theirs, and
 other gods other gifts, and finally calling her by the name
 [Pandora] which tells of gift and of all giving- for all have added
 something to this formation brought to being by a Promethean, a
 fore-thinking power. As for the rejection of Prometheus' gift by
 after-thought, Epimetheus, what can this signify but that the wiser
 choice is to remain in the Intellectual realm? Pandora's creator is
 fettered, to signify that he is in some sense held by his own
 creation; such a fettering is external and the release by Hercules
 tells that there is power in Prometheus, so that he need not 
 remain in
 bonds.
 
 Take the myth as we may, it is certainly such an account of the
 bestowal of gifts upon the kosmos as harmonizes with our explanation
 of the universal system.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. The souls peering forth from the Intellectual Realm descend
 first to the heavens and there put on a body; this becomes 
 at once the
 medium by which as they reach out more and more towards magnitude
 [physical extension] they proceed to bodies progressively 
 more earthy.
 Some even plunge from heaven to the very lowest of corporeal forms;
 others pass, stage by stage, too feeble to lift towards the 
 higher the
 burden they carry, weighed downwards by their heaviness and
 forgetfulness.
 
 As for the differences among them, these are due to variation in
 the bodies entered, or to the accidents of life, or to upbringing,
 or to inherent peculiarities of temperament, or to all these
 influences together, or to specific combinations of them.
 
 Then again some have fallen unreservedly into the power of the
 destiny ruling here: some yielding betimes are betimes too their
 own: there are those who, while they accept what must be borne, have
 the strength of self-mastery in all that is left to their own act;
 they have given themselves to another dispensation: they live by the
 code of the aggregate of beings, the code which is woven out of the
 Reason-Principles and all the other causes ruling in the kosmos, out
 of soul-movements and out of laws springing in the Supreme; a code,
 therefore, consonant with those higher existences, founded upon
 them, linking their sequents back to them, keeping unshakeably true
 all that is capable of holding itself set towards the divine nature,
 and leading round by all appropriate means whatsoever is less
 natively apt.
 
 In fine all diversity of condition in the lower spheres is
 determined by the descendent beings themselves.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. The punishment justly overtaking the wicked must therefore
 be ascribed to the kosmic order which leads all in 
 accordance with the
 right.
 
 But what of chastisements, poverty, illness, falling 
 upon the good
 outside of all justice? These events, we will be told, are equally
 interwoven into the world order and fall under prediction, and must
 consequently have a cause in the general reason: are they 
 therefore to
 be charged to past misdoing?
 
 No: such misfortunes do not answer to reasons established in the
 nature of things; they are not laid up in the master-facts of the
 universe, but were merely accidental sequents: a house falls, and
 anyone that chances to be underneath is killed, no matter 
 what sort of
 man he be: two objects are moving in perfect order- or one if you
 like- but anything getting in the way is wounded or trampled down.
 Or we may reason that the undeserved stroke can be no evil to the
 sufferer in view of the beneficent interweaving of the All or again,
 no doubt, that nothing is unjust that finds justification in a past
 history.
 
 We may not think of some things being fitted into a system with
 others abandoned to the capricious; if things must happen by 
 cause, by
 natural sequences, under one Reason-Principle and a single 
 set scheme,
 we must admit that the minor equally with the major is fitted into
 that order and pattern.
 
 Wrong-doing from man to man is wrong in the doer and must be
 imputed, but, as belonging to the established order of the 
 universe is
 not a wrong even as regards the innocent sufferer; it is a thing
 that had to be, and, if the sufferer is good, the issue is to his
 gain. For we cannot think that this ordered combination proceeds
 without God and justice; we must take it to be precise in the
 distribution of due, while, yet, the reasons of things elude us, and
 to our ignorance the scheme presents matter of censure.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. Various considerations explain why the Souls going forth
 from the Intellectual proceed first to the heavenly regions. The
 heavens, as the noblest portion of sensible space, would border with
 the least exalted of the Intellectual, and will, therefore, be first
 ensouled first to participate as most apt; while what is of earth is
 at the very extremity of progression, least endowed towards
 participation, remotest from the unembodied.
 
 All the souls, then, shine down upon the heavens and spend there
 the main of themselves and the best; only their lower phases
 illuminate the lower realms; and those souls which descend deepest
 show their light furthest down- not themselves the better for the
 depth to which they have penetrated.
 
 There is, we may put it, something that is centre; about it, a
 circle of light shed from it; round centre and first circle alike,
 another circle, light from light; outside that again, not another
 circle of light but one which, lacking light of its own, must borrow.
 
 The last we may figure to ourselves as a revolving circle, or
 rather a sphere, of a nature to receive light from that third realm,
 its next higher, in proportion to the light which that itself
 receives. Thus all begins with the great light, shining
 self-centred; in accordance with the reigning plan [that of 
 emanation]
 this gives forth its brilliance; the later [divine] existents
 [souls] add their radiation- some of them remaining above, 
 while there
 are some that are drawn further downward, attracted by the splendour
 of the object they illuminate. These last find that their 
 charges need
 more and more care: the steersman of a storm-tossed ship is so
 intent on saving it that he forgets his own interest and never
 thinks that he is recurrently in peril of being dragged down with
 the vessel; similarly the souls are intent upon contriving for their
 charges and finally come to be pulled down by them; they are
 fettered in bonds of sorcery, gripped and held by their concern for
 the realm of Nature.
 
 If every living being were of the character of the All-perfect,
 self-sufficing, in peril from no outside influence the soul 
 now spoken
 of as indwelling would not occupy the body; it would infuse 
 life while
 clinging, entire, within the Supreme.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. There remains still something to be said on the question
 whether the soul uses deliberate reason before its descent and again
 when it has left the body.
 
 Reasoning is for this sphere; it is the act of the soul fallen
 into perplexity, distracted with cares, diminished in strength: the
 need of deliberation goes with the less self-sufficing intelligence;
 craftsmen faced by a difficulty stop to consider; where there is no
 problem their art works on by its own forthright power.
 
 But if souls in the Supreme operate without reasoning, how can
 they be called reasoning souls?
 
 One answer might be that they have the power of deliberating to
 happy issue, should occasion arise: but all is met by repudiating
 the particular kind of reasoning intended [the earthly and
 discursive type]; we may represent to ourselves a reasoning 
 that flows
 uninterruptedly from the Intellectual-Principle in them, an inherent
 state, an enduring activity, an assertion that is real; in this way
 they would be users of reason even when in that overworld. We
 certainly cannot think of them, it seems to me, as employing words
 when, though they may occupy bodies in the heavenly region, they are
 essentially in the Intellectual: and very surely the deliberation of
 doubt and difficulty which they practise here must be unknown to
 them There; all their act must fall into place by sheer 
 force of their
 nature; there can be no question of commanding or of taking counsel;
 they will know, each, what is to be communicated from another, by
 present consciousness. Even in our own case here, eyes often 
 know what
 is not spoken; and There all is pure, every being is, as it were, an
 eye, nothing is concealed or sophisticated, there is no need of
 speech, everything is seen and known. As for the Celestials [the
 Daimones] and souls in the air, they may well use speech; for all
 such are simply Animate [= Beings].
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 19
 
 19. Are we to think of the indivisible phase of the soul and the
 divided as making one thing in a coalescence; or is the 
 indivisible in
 a place of its own and under conditions of its own, the divisible
 being a sequent upon it, a separate part of it, as distinct as the
 reasoning phase is from the unreasoning?
 
 The answer to this question will emerge when we make plain the
 nature and function to be attributed to each.
 
 The indivisible phase is mentioned [in the passage of Plato]
 without further qualification; but not so the divisible; "that soul"
 we read "which becomes divisible in bodies"- and even this last is
 presented as becoming partible, not as being so once for all.
 
 "In bodies": we must then, satisfy ourselves as to what form of
 soul is required to produce life in the corporeal, and what 
 there must
 be of soul present throughout such a body, such a completed organism.
 
 Now, every sensitive power- by the fact of being sensitive
 throughout- tends to become a thing of parts: present at every
 distinct point of sensitiveness, it may be thought of as divided. In
 the sense, however, that it is present as a whole at every 
 such point,
 it cannot be said to be wholly divided; it "becomes divisible in
 body." We may be told that no such partition is implied in any
 sensations but those of touch; but this is not so; where the
 participant is body [of itself insensitive and non-transmitting]
 that divisibility in the sensitive agent will be a condition of all
 other sensations, though in less degree than in the case of touch.
 Similarly the vegetative function in the soul, with that of growth,
 indicates divisibility; and, admitting such locations as that of
 desire at the liver and emotional activity at the heart, we have the
 same result. It is to be noted, however, as regards these [the less
 corporeal] sensations, that the body may possibly not experience
 them as a fact of the conjoint thing but in another mode, as rising
 within some one of the elements of which it has been participant
 [as inherent, purely, in some phase of the associated soul]:
 reasoning and the act of the intellect, for instance, are not vested
 in the body; their task is not accomplished by means of the 
 body which
 in fact is detrimental to any thinking on which it is allowed to
 intrude.
 
 Thus the indivisible phase of the soul stands distinct from the
 divisible; they do not form a unity, but, on the contrary, a whole
 consisting of parts, each part a self-standing thing having its own
 peculiar virtue. None the less, if that phase which becomes
 divisible in body holds indivisibility by communication from the
 superior power, then this one same thing [the soul in body] may be
 at once indivisible and divisible; it will be, as it were, a blend,
 a thing made up of its own divisible self with, in addition, the
 quality that it derives from above itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 20
 
 20. Here a question rises to which we must find an 
 answer: whether
 these and the other powers which we call "parts" of the Soul are
 situated, all, in place; or whether some have place and standpoint,
 others not; or whether again none are situated in place.
 
 The matter is difficult: if we do not allot to each of the parts
 of the Soul some form of Place, but leave all unallocated- no more
 within the body than outside it- we leave the body soulless, and are
 at a loss to explain plausibly the origin of acts performed by means
 of the bodily organs: if, on the other hand, we suppose some of
 those phases to be [capable of situation] in place but others not
 so, we will be supposing that those parts to which we deny place are
 ineffective in us, or, in other words, that we do not possess our
 entire soul.
 
 This simply shows that neither the soul entire nor any part of
 it may be considered to be within the body as in a space: space is a
 container, a container of body; it is the home of such things as
 consist of isolated parts, things, therefore, in which at no point
 is there an entirety; now, the soul is not a body and is no more
 contained than containing.
 
 Neither is it in body as in some vessel: whether as vessel or as
 place of location, the body would remain, in itself, 
 unensouled. If we
 are to think of some passing-over from the soul- that self-gathered
 thing- to the containing vessel, then soul is diminished by just as
 much as the vessel takes.
 
 Space, again, in the strict sense is unembodied, and is not,
 itself, body; why, then, should it need soul?
 
 Besides [if the soul were contained as in space] contact would
 be only at the surface of the body, not throughout the entire mass.
 
 Many other considerations equally refute the notion that the
 soul is in body as [an object] in space; for example, this 
 space would
 be shifted with every movement, and a thing itself would 
 carry its own
 space about.
 
 Of course if by space we understand the interval separating
 objects, it is still less possible that the soul be in body as in
 space: such a separating interval must be a void; but body is not a
 void; the void must be that in which body is placed; body [not soul]
 will be in the void.
 
 Nor can it be in the body as in some substratum: anything in a
 substratum is a condition affecting that- a colour, a form- but the
 soul is a separate existence.
 
 Nor is it present as a part in the whole; soul is no 
 part of body.
 If we are asked to think of soul as a part in the living total we
 are faced with the old difficulty: How it is in that whole. It is
 certainly not there as the wine is in the wine jar, or as the jar in
 the jar, or as some absolute is self-present.
 
 Nor can the presence be that of a whole in its part: It would be
 absurd to think of the soul as a total of which the body should
 represent the parts.
 
 It is not present as Form is in Matter; for the Form as in
 Matter is inseparable and, further, is something superimposed upon
 an already existent thing; soul, on the contrary, is that which
 engenders the Form residing within the Matter and therefore 
 is not the
 Form. If the reference is not to the Form actually present, but to
 Form as a thing existing apart from all formed objects, it is hard
 to see how such an entity has found its way into body, and 
 at any rate
 this makes the soul separable.
 
 How comes it then that everyone speaks of soul as being in body?
 
 Because the soul is not seen and the body is: we perceive the
 body, and by its movement and sensation we understand that it is
 ensouled, and we say that it possesses a soul; to speak of residence
 is a natural sequence. If the soul were visible, an object of the
 senses, radiating throughout the entire life, if it were manifest in
 full force to the very outermost surface, we would no longer speak
 of soul as in body; we would say the minor was within the major, the
 contained within the container, the fleeting within the perdurable.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 21
 
 21. What does all this come to? What answer do we give 
 to him who,
 with no opinion of his own to assert, asks us to explain this
 presence? And what do we say to the question whether there 
 is one only
 mode of presence of the entire soul or different modes, phase and
 phase?
 
 Of the modes currently accepted for the presence of one thing in
 another, none really meets the case of the soul's relation to the
 body. Thus we are given as a parallel the steersman in the ship;
 this serves adequately to indicate that the soul is potentially
 separable, but the mode of presence, which is what we are seeking,
 it does not exhibit.
 
 We can imagine it within the body in some incidental way- for
 example, as a voyager in a ship- but scarcely as the steersman: and,
 of course, too, the steersman is not omnipresent to the ship as the
 soul is to the body.
 
 May we, perhaps, compare it to the science or skill that acts
 through its appropriate instruments- through a helm, let us 
 say, which
 should happen to be a live thing- so that the soul effecting the
 movements dictated by seamanship is an indwelling directive force?
 
 No: the comparison breaks down, since the science is something
 outside of helm and ship.
 
 Is it any help to adopt the illustration of the steersman taking
 the helm, and to station the soul within the body as the 
 steersman may
 be thought to be within the material instrument through which he
 works? Soul, whenever and wherever it chooses to operate, 
 does in much
 that way move the body.
 
 No; even in this parallel we have no explanation of the mode of
 presence within the instrument; we cannot be satisfied 
 without further
 search, a closer approach.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 22
 
 22. May we think that the mode of the soul's presence to body is
 that of the presence of light to the air?
 
 This certainly is presence with distinction: the light
 penetrates through and through, but nowhere coalesces; the light is
 the stable thing, the air flows in and out; when the air 
 passes beyond
 the lit area it is dark; under the light it is lit: we have a true
 parallel to what we have been saying of body and soul, for the air
 is in the light quite as much as the light in the air.
 
 Plato therefore is wise when, in treating of the All, he puts
 the body in its soul, and not its soul in the body, and says that,
 while there is a region of that soul which contains body, there is
 another region to which body does not enter- certain powers, that
 is, with which body has no concern. And what is true of the All-Soul
 is true of the others.
 
 There are, therefore, certain soul-powers whose presence to body
 must be denied.
 
 The phases present are those which the nature of body demands:
 they are present without being resident- either in any parts of the
 body or in the body as a whole.
 
 For the purposes of sensation the sensitive phase of the soul is
 present to the entire sensitive being: for the purposes of act,
 differentiation begins; every soul phase operates at a point
 peculiar to itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 23
 
 23. I explain: A living body is illuminated by soul: each organ
 and member participates in soul after some manner peculiar to
 itself; the organ is adapted to a certain function, and this fitness
 is the vehicle of the soul-faculty under which the function is
 performed; thus the seeing faculty acts through the eyes, the
 hearing faculty through the ears, the tasting faculty through the
 tongue, the faculty of smelling through the nostrils, and the
 faculty of sentient touch is present throughout, since in this
 particular form of perception the entire body is an instrument in
 the soul's service.
 
 The vehicles of touch are mainly centred in the nerves- which
 moreover are vehicles of the faculty by which the movements of the
 living being are affected- in them the soul-faculty concerned makes
 itself present; the nerves start from the brain. The brain therefore
 has been considered as the centre and seat of the principle which
 determines feeling and impulse and the entire act of the 
 organism as a
 living thing; where the instruments are found to be linked, there
 the operating faculty is assumed to be situated. But it 
 would be wiser
 to say only that there is situated the first activity of the 
 operating
 faculty: the power to be exercised by the operator- in keeping with
 the particular instrument- must be considered as concentrated at the
 point at which the instrument is to be first applied; or, since the
 soul's faculty is of universal scope the sounder statement 
 is that the
 point of origin of the instrument is the point of origin of the act.
 
 Now, the faculty presiding over sensation and impulse is 
 vested in
 the sensitive and representative soul; it draws upon the
 Reason-Principle immediately above itself; downward, it is in
 contact with an inferior of its own: on this analogy the uppermost
 member of the living being was taken by the ancients to be obviously
 its seat; they lodged it in the brain, or not exactly in the 
 brain but
 in that sensitive part which is the medium through which the
 Reason-Principle impinges upon the brain. They saw that 
 something must
 be definitely allocated to body- at the point most receptive of the
 act of reason- while something, utterly isolated from body must be
 in contact with that superior thing which is a form of soul [and not
 merely of the vegetative or other quasi-corporeal forms but] of that
 soul apt to the appropriation of the perceptions originating in the
 Reason-Principle.
 
 Such a linking there must be, since in perception there is some
 element of judging, in representation something intuitional, 
 and since
 impulse and appetite derive from representation and reason. The
 reasoning faculty, therefore, is present where these experiences
 occur, present not as in a place but in the fact that what is there
 draws upon it. As regards perception we have already 
 explained in what
 sense it is local.
 
 But every living being includes the vegetal principle, that
 principle of growth and nourishment which maintains the organism by
 means of the blood; this nourishing medium is contained in the
 veins; the veins and blood have their origin in the liver: from
 observation of these facts the power concerned was assigned a place;
 the phase of the soul which has to do with desire was 
 allocated to the
 liver. Certainly what brings to birth and nourishes and gives growth
 must have the desire of these functions. Blood- subtle, light,
 swift, pure- is the vehicle most apt to animal spirit: the heart,
 then, its well-spring, the place where such blood is sifted into
 being, is taken as the fixed centre of the ebullition of the
 passionate nature.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 24
 
 24. Now comes the question of the soul leaving the body; where
 does it go?
 
 It cannot remain in this world where there is no natural 
 recipient
 for it; and it cannot remain attached to anything not of a character
 to hold it: it can be held here when only it is less than wise,
 containing within itself something of that which lures it.
 
 If it does contain any such alien element it gives itself, with
 increasing attachment, to the sphere to which that element naturally
 belongs and tends.
 
 The space open to the soul's resort is vast and diverse; the
 difference will come by the double force of the individual condition
 and of the justice reigning in things. No one can ever escape the
 suffering entailed by ill deeds done: the divine law is ineluctable,
 carrying bound up, as one with it, the fore-ordained execution of
 its doom. The sufferer, all unaware, is swept onward towards his
 due, hurried always by the restless driving of his errors, until at
 last wearied out by that against which he struggled, he 
 falls into his
 fit place and, by self-chosen movement, is brought to the 
 lot he never
 chose. And the law decrees, also, the intensity and the duration of
 the suffering while it carries with it, too, the lifting of
 chastisement and the faculty of rising from those places of pain-
 all by power of the harmony that maintains the universal scheme.
 
 Souls, body-bound, are apt to body-punishment; clean souls no
 longer drawing to themselves at any point any vestige of body are,
 by their very being, outside the bodily sphere; body-free,
 containing nothing of body- there where Essence is, and 
 Being, and the
 Divine within the Divinity, among Those, within That, such a 
 soul must
 be.
 
 If you still ask Where, you must ask where those Beings are- and
 in your seeking, seek otherwise than with the sight, and not as one
 seeking for body.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 25
 
 25. Now comes the question, equally calling for an 
 answer, whether
 those souls that have quitted the places of earth retain memory of
 their lives- all souls or some, of all things, or of some 
 things, and,
 again, for ever or merely for some period not very long after their
 withdrawal.
 
 A true investigation of this matter requires us to 
 establish first
 what a remembering principle must be- I do not mean what memory is,
 but in what order of beings it can occur. The nature of memory has
 been indicated, laboured even, elsewhere; we still must try to
 understand more clearly what characteristics are present where
 memory exists.
 
 Now a memory has to do with something brought into ken from
 without, something learned or something experienced; the
 Memory-Principle, therefore, cannot belong to such beings as are
 immune from experience and from time.
 
 No memory, therefore, can be ascribed to any divine being, or to
 the Authentic-Existent or the Intellectual-Principle: these are
 intangibly immune; time does not approach them; they possess
 eternity centred around Being; they know nothing of past and
 sequent; all is an unbroken state of identity, not receptive of
 change. Now a being rooted in unchanging identity cannot entertain
 memory, since it has not and never had a state differing from any
 previous state, or any new intellection following upon a former one,
 so as to be aware of contrast between a present perception and one
 remembered from before.
 
 But what prevents such a being [from possessing memory in the
 sense of] perceiving, without variation in itself, such outside
 changes as, for example, the kosmic periods?
 
 Simply the fact that following the changes of the 
 revolving kosmos
 it would have perception of earlier and later: intuition and memory
 are distinct.
 
 We cannot hold its self-intellections to be acts of memory; this
 is no question of something entering from without, to be grasped and
 held in fear of an escape; if its intellections could slip away from
 it [as a memory might] its very Essence [as the Hypostasis 
 of inherent
 Intellection] would be in peril.
 
 For the same reason memory, in the current sense, cannot be
 attributed to the soul in connection with the ideas inherent in its
 essence: these it holds not as a memory but as a possession, though,
 by its very entrance into this sphere, they are no longer 
 the mainstay
 of its Act.
 
 The Soul-action which is to be observed seems to have induced
 the Ancients to ascribe memory, and "Recollection," [the Platonic
 Anamnesis] to souls bringing into outward manifestation the 
 ideas they
 contain: we see at once that the memory here indicated is another
 kind; it is a memory outside of time.
 
 But, perhaps, this is treating too summarily a matter which
 demands minute investigation. It might be doubted whether that
 recollection, that memory, really belongs to the highest soul and
 not rather to another, a dimmer, or even to the Couplement, the
 Living-Being. And if to that dimmer soul, when and how has it come
 to be present; if to the Couplement, again when and how?
 
 We are driven thus to enquire into these several points: in
 which of the constituents of our nature is memory vested- 
 the question
 with which we started- if in the soul, then in what power or part;
 if in the Animate or Couplement- which has been supposed, 
 similarly to
 be the seat of sensation- then by what mode it is present, and how
 we are to define the Couplement; finally whether sensation and
 intellectual acts may be ascribed to one and the same agent, or
 imply two distinct principles.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 26
 
 26. Now if sensations of the active order depend upon the
 Couplement of soul and body, sensation must be of that double
 nature. Hence it is classed as one of the shared acts: the soul, in
 the feeling, may be compared to the workman in such operations as
 boring or weaving, the body to the tool employed: the body is
 passive and menial; the soul is active, reading such impressions as
 are made upon the body or discerned by means of the body, perhaps
 entertaining only a judgement formed as the result of the bodily
 experiences.
 
 In such a process it is at once clear that the sensation is a
 shared task; but the memory is not thus made over to the Couplement,
 since the soul has from the first taken over the impression, 
 either to
 retain or to reject.
 
 It might be ventured that memory, no less than sensation, is a
 function of the Couplement, on the ground that bodily constitution
 determines our memories good or bad; but the answer would come that,
 whether the body happens or not to be a hindrance, the act of
 remembering would still be an act of the soul. And in the case of
 matters learned [and not merely felt, as corporeal experiences], how
 can we think of the Couplement of soul and body as the remembering
 principle? Here, surely, it must be soul alone?
 
 We may be told that the living-being is a Couplement in the
 sense of something entirely distinct formed from the two elements
 [so that it might have memory though neither soul nor body had it].
 But, to begin with, it is absurd to class the living-being as
 neither body nor soul; these two things cannot so change as to make
 a distinct third, nor can they blend so utterly that the soul shall
 become a mere faculty of the animate whole. And, further, supposing
 they could so blend, memory would still be due to the soul just as
 in honey-wine all the sweetness will be due to the honey.
 
 It may be suggested the while the soul is perhaps not in itself
 a remembering principle, yet that, having lost its purity 
 and acquired
 some degree of modification by its presence in body, it becomes
 capable of reproducing the imprints of sensible objects and
 experiences, and that, seated, as roughly speaking it is, within the
 body, it may reasonably be thought capable of accepting such
 impressions, and in such a manner as to retain them [thus in some
 sense possessing memory].
 
 But, to begin with, these imprints are not magnitudes [are not
 of corporeal nature at all]; there is no resemblance to seal
 impressions, no stamping of a resistant matter, for there is neither
 the down-thrust [as of the seal] nor [the acceptance] as in the wax:
 the process is entirely of the intellect, though exercised 
 upon things
 of sense; and what kind of resistance [or other physical action] can
 be affirmed in matters of the intellectual order, or what need can
 there be of body or bodily quality as a means?
 
 Further there is one order of which the memory must obviously
 belong to the soul; it alone can remember its own movements, for
 example its desires and those frustrations of desire in which the
 coveted thing never came to the body: the body can have nothing to
 tell about things which never approached it, and the soul cannot use
 the body as a means to the remembrance of what the body by its
 nature cannot know.
 
 If the soul is to have any significance- to be a definite
 principle with a function of its own- we are forced to recognize two
 orders of fact, an order in which the body is a means but all
 culminates in soul, and an order which is of the soul alone. This
 being admitted, aspiration will belong to soul, and so, as a
 consequence, will that memory of the aspiration and of its
 attainment or frustration, without which the soul's nature would
 fall into the category of the unstable [that is to say of the
 undivine, unreal]. Deny this character of the soul and at once we
 refuse it perception, consciousness, any power of comparison, almost
 any understanding. Yet these powers of which, embodied it becomes
 the source cannot be absent from its own nature. On the contrary; it
 possesses certain activities to be expressed in various functions
 whose accomplishment demands bodily organs; at its entry it brings
 with it [as vested in itself alone] the powers necessary for some of
 these functions, while in the case of others it brings the very
 activities themselves.
 
 Memory, in point of fact, is impeded by the body: even as things
 are, addition often brings forgetfulness; with thinning and dearing
 away, memory will often revive. The soul is a stability; the
 shifting and fleeting thing which body is can be a cause only of its
 forgetting not of its remembering- Lethe stream may be understood
 in this sense- and memory is a fact of the soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 27
 
 27. But of what soul; of that which we envisage as the more
 divine, by which we are human beings, or that other which 
 springs from
 the All?
 
 Memory must be admitted in both of these, personal memories and
 shared memories; and when the two souls are together, the memories
 also are as one; when they stand apart, assuming that both exist and
 endure, each soon for gets the other's affairs, retaining 
 for a longer
 time its own. Thus it is that the Shade of Hercules in the lower
 regions- this "Shade," as I take it, being the characteristically
 human part- remembers all the action and experience of the 
 life, since
 that career was mainly of the hero's personal shaping; the 
 other souls
 [soulphases] going to constitute the joint-being could, for all
 their different standing, have nothing to recount but the events of
 that same life, doings which they knew from the time of their
 association: perhaps they would add also some moral judgement.
 
 What the Hercules standing outside the Shade spoke of we are not
 told: what can we think that other, the freed and isolated, 
 soul would
 recount?
 
 The soul, still a dragged captive, will tell of all the man did
 and felt; but upon death there will appear, as time passes, memories
 of the lives lived before, some of the events of the most recent
 life being dismissed as trivial. As it grows away from the body, it
 will revive things forgotten in the corporeal state, and if it
 passes in and out of one body after another, it will tell over the
 events of the discarded life, it will treat as present that which it
 has just left, and it will remember much from the former existence.
 But with lapse of time it will come to forgetfulness of many things
 that were mere accretion.
 
 Then free and alone at last, what will it have to remember?
 
 The answer to that question depends on our discovering in what
 faculty of the soul memory resides.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 28
 
 28. Is memory vested in the faculty by which we perceive and
 learn? Or does it reside in the faculty by which we set things
 before our minds as objects of desire or of anger, the passionate
 faculty?
 
 This will be maintained on the ground that there could 
 scarcely be
 both a first faculty in direct action and a second to remember what
 that first experiences. It is certain that the desiring 
 faculty is apt
 to be stirred by what it has once enjoyed; the object presents
 itself again; evidently, memory is at work; why else, the same
 object with the same attraction?
 
 But, at that, we might reasonably ascribe to the desiring
 faculty the very perception of the desired objects and then 
 the desire
 itself to the perceptive faculty, and so on all through, and in the
 end conclude that the distinctive names merely indicate the function
 which happens to be uppermost.
 
 Yet the perception is very different from faculty to faculty;
 certainly it is sight and not desire that sees the object; desire is
 stirred merely as a result of the seeing, by a transmission; its act
 is not in the nature of an identification of an object seen; all is
 simply blind response [automatic reaction]. Similarly with 
 rage; sight
 reveals the offender and the passion leaps; we may think of 
 a shepherd
 seeing a wolf at his flock, and a dog, seeing nothing, who springs to
 the scent or the sound.
 
 In other words the desiring faculty has had the emotion, but the
 trace it keeps of the event is not a memory; it is a condition,
 something passively accepted: there is another faculty that was
 aware of the enjoyment and retains the memory of what has happened.
 This is confirmed by the fact that many satisfactions which the
 desiring faculty has enjoyed are not retained in the memory: 
 if memory
 resided in the desiring faculty, such forgetfulness could not be.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 29
 
 29. Are we, then, to refer memory to the perceptive 
 faculty and so
 make one principle of our nature the seat of both awareness and
 remembrance?
 
 Now supposing the very Shade, as we were saying in the case of
 Hercules, has memory, then the perceptive faculty is twofold.
 
 [(And if (on the same supposition) the faculty that remembers is
 not the faculty that perceives, but some other thing, then the
 remembering faculty is twofold.]
 
 And further if the perceptive faculty [= the memory] deals with
 matters learned [as well as with matters of observation and feeling]
 it will be the faculty for the processes of reason also: but 
 these two
 orders certainly require two separate faculties.
 
 Must we then suppose a common faculty of apprehension [one
 covering both sense perceptions and ideas] and assign memory in both
 orders to this?
 
 The solution might serve if there were one and the same 
 percipient
 for objects of sense and objects of the Intellectual-Kind; but if
 these stand in definite duality, then, for all we can say or do, we
 are left with two separate principles of memory; and, supposing each
 of the two orders of soul to possess both principles, then we have
 four.
 
 And, on general grounds, what compelling reason is there that
 the principle by which we perceive should be the principle 
 by which we
 remember, that these two acts should be vested in the one 
 faculty? Why
 must the seat of our intellectual action be also the seat of our
 remembrance of that action? The most powerful thought does not
 always go with the readiest memory; people of equal 
 perception are not
 equally good at remembering; some are especially gifted in 
 perception,
 others, never swift to grasp, are strong to retain.
 
 But, once more, admitting two distinct principles, 
 something quite
 separate remembering what sense-perception has first known- 
 still this
 something must have felt what it is required to remember?
 
 No; we may well conceive that where there is to be memory of a
 sense-perception, this perception becomes a mere 
 presentment, and that
 to this image-grasping power, a distinct thing, belongs the memory,
 the retention of the object: for in this imaging faculty the
 perception culminates; the impression passes away but the vision
 remains present to the imagination.
 
 By the fact of harbouring the presentment of an object that has
 disappeared, the imagination is, at once, a seat of memory: where
 the persistence of the image is brief, the memory is poor; people of
 powerful memory are those in whom the image-holding power is firmer,
 not easily allowing the record to be jostled out of its grip.
 
 Remembrance, thus, is vested in the imaging faculty; and memory
 deals with images. Its differing quality or degree from man 
 to man, we
 would explain by difference or similarity in the strength of the
 individual powers, by conduct like or unlike, by bodily conditions
 present or absent, producing change and disorder or not- a 
 point this,
 however, which need not detain us here.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 30
 
 30. But what of the memory of mental acts: do these also fall
 under the imaging faculty?
 
 If every mental act is accompanied by an image we may 
 well believe
 that this image, fixed and like a picture of the thought, would
 explain how we remember the object of knowledge once entertained.
 But if there is no such necessary image, another solution must be
 sought. Perhaps memory would be the reception, into the image-taking
 faculty, of the Reason-Principle which accompanies the mental
 conception: this mental conception- an indivisible thing, 
 and one that
 never rises to the exterior of the consciousness- lies unknown
 below; the Reason-Principle the revealer, the bridge between the
 concept and the image-taking faculty exhibits the concept as in a
 mirror; the apprehension by the image-taking faculty would thus
 constitute the enduring presence of the concept, would be our memory
 of it.
 
 This explains, also, another fact: the soul is unfailingly
 intent upon intellection; only when it acts upon this image-taking
 faculty does its intellection become a human perception:
 intellection is one thing, the perception of an intellection is
 another: we are continuously intuitive but we are not unbrokenly
 aware: the reason is that the recipient in us receives from both
 sides, absorbing not merely intellections but also sense-perceptions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 31
 
 31. But if each of the two phases of the soul, as we have said,
 possesses memory, and memory is vested in the imaging faculty, there
 must be two such faculties. Now that is all very well as long as the
 two souls stand apart; but, when they are at one in us, what becomes
 of the two faculties, and in which of them is the imaging faculty
 vested?
 
 If each soul has its own imaging faculty the images must in all
 cases be duplicated, since we cannot think that one faculty 
 deals only
 with intellectual objects, and the other with objects of sense, a
 distinction which inevitably implies the co-existence in man of two
 life-principles utterly unrelated.
 
 And if both orders of image act upon both orders of soul, what
 difference is there in the souls; and how does the fact escape our
 knowledge?
 
 The answer is that, when the two souls chime each with each, the
 two imaging faculties no longer stand apart; the union is 
 dominated by
 the more powerful of the faculties of the soul, and thus the image
 perceived is as one: the less powerful is like a shadow 
 attending upon
 the dominant, like a minor light merging into a greater: 
 when they are
 in conflict, in discord, the minor is distinctly apart, a
 self-standing thing- though its isolation is not perceived, for the
 simple reason that the separate being of the two souls escapes
 observation.
 
 The two have run into a unity in which, yet, one is the loftier:
 this loftier knows all; when it breaks from the union, it 
 retains some
 of the experiences of its companion, but dismisses others; thus we
 accept the talk of our less valued associates, but, on a change of
 company, we remember little from the first set and more from those
 in whom we recognize a higher quality.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 32
 
 32. But the memory of friends, children, wife? Country too, and
 all that the better sort of man may reasonably remember?
 
 All these, the one [the lower man] retains with emotion, the
 authentic man passively: for the experience, certainly, was 
 first felt
 in that lower phase from which, however, the best of such
 impressions pass over to the graver soul in the degree in which the
 two are in communication.
 
 The lower soul must be always striving to attain to memory of
 the activities of the higher: this will be especially so when it is
 itself of a fine quality, for there will always be some that are
 better from the beginning and bettered here by the guidance of the
 higher.
 
 The loftier, on the contrary, must desire to come to a happy
 forgetfulness of all that has reached it through the lower: for one
 reason, there is always the possibility that the very excellence of
 the lower prove detrimental to the higher, tending to keep it down
 by sheer force of vitality. In any case the more urgent the
 intention towards the Supreme, the more extensive will be the soul's
 forgetfulness, unless indeed, when the entire living has, even here,
 been such that memory has nothing but the noblest to deal with: in
 this world itself, all is best when human interests have been held
 aloof; so, therefore, it must be with the memory of them. In this
 sense we may truly say that the good soul is the forgetful. It flees
 multiplicity; it seeks to escape the unbounded by drawing all to
 unity, for only thus is it free from entanglement, light-footed,
 self-conducted. Thus it is that even in this world the soul which
 has the desire of the other is putting away, amid its actual 
 life, all
 that is foreign to that order. It brings there very little of what
 it has gathered here; as long as it is in the heavenly regions only,
 it will have more than it can retain.
 
 The Hercules of the heavenly regions would still tell of his
 feats: but there is the other man to whom all of that is trivial; he
 has been translated to a holier place; he has won his way to the
 Intellectual Realm; he is more than Hercules, proven in the 
 combats in
 which the combatants are the wise.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FOURTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 PROBLEMS OF THE SOUL (2).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. What, then, will be the Soul's discourse, what its memories
 in the Intellectual Realm, when at last it has won its way to that
 Essence?
 
 Obviously from what we have been saying, it will be in
 contemplation of that order, and have its Act upon the things among
 which it now is; failing such Contemplation and Act, its being is
 not there. Of things of earth it will know nothing; it will not, for
 example, remember an act of philosophic virtue, or even that in its
 earthly career it had contemplation of the Supreme.
 
 When we seize anything in the direct intellectual act there is
 room for nothing else than to know and to contemplate the object;
 and in the knowing there is not included any previous knowledge; all
 such assertion of stage and progress belongs to the lower and is a
 sign of the altered; this means that, once purely in the 
 Intellectual,
 no one of us can have any memory of our experience here. Further; if
 all intellection is timeless- as appears from the fact that the
 Intellectual beings are of eternity not of time- there can be no
 memory in the intellectual world, not merely none of earthly things
 but none whatever: all is presence There; for nothing passes away,
 there is no change from old to new.
 
 This, however, does not alter the fact that distinction exists
 in that realm- downwards from the Supreme to the Ideas, upward from
 the Ideas to the Universal and to the Supreme. Admitting that the
 Highest, as a self-contained unity, has no outgoing effect, that
 does not prevent the soul which has attained to the Supreme from
 exerting its own characteristic Act: it certainly may have the
 intuition, not by stages and parts, of that Being which is without
 stage and part.
 
 But that would be in the nature of grasping a pure unity?
 
 No: in the nature of grasping all the intellectual facts 
 of a many
 that constitutes a unity. For since the object of vision has variety
 [distinction within its essential oneness] the intuition must be
 multiple and the intuitions various, just as in a face we see at the
 one glance eyes and nose and all the rest.
 
 But is not this impossible when the object to be thus divided
 and treated as a thing of grades, is a pure unity?
 
 No: there has already been discrimination within the
 Intellectual-Principle; the Act of the soul is little more than a
 reading of this.
 
 First and last is in the Ideas not a matter of time, and so does
 not bring time into the soul's intuition of earlier and later among
 them. There is a grading by order as well: the ordered disposition
 of some growing thing begins with root and reaches to topmost point,
 but, to one seeing the plant as a whole, there is no other first and
 last than simply that of the order.
 
 Still, the soul [in this intuition within the divine] looks to
 what is a unity; next it entertains multiplicity, all that is: how
 explain this grasping first of the unity and later of the rest?
 
 The explanation is that the unity of this power [the Supreme] is
 such as to allow of its being multiple to another principle [the
 soul], to which it is all things and therefore does not 
 present itself
 as one indivisible object of intuition: its activities do not [like
 its essence] fall under the rule of unity; they are for ever
 multiple in virtue of that abiding power, and in their outgoing they
 actually become all things.
 
 For with the Intellectual or Supreme- considered as distinct
 from the One- there is already the power of harbouring that
 Principle of Multiplicity, the source of things not previously
 existent in its superior.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Enough on that point: we come now to the question of memory
 of the personality?
 
 There will not even be memory of the personality; no thought
 that the contemplator is the self- Socrates, for example- or that it
 is Intellect or Soul. In this connection it should be borne in mind
 that, in contemplative vision, especially when it is vivid, 
 we are not
 at the time aware of our own personality; we are in possession of
 ourselves but the activity is towards the object of vision with
 which the thinker becomes identified; he has made himself over as
 matter to be shaped; he takes ideal form under the action of the
 vision while remaining, potentially, himself. This means that he is
 actively himself when he has intellection of nothing.
 
 Or, if he is himself [pure and simple], he is empty of 
 all: if, on
 the contrary, he is himself [by the self-possession of
 contemplation] in such a way as to be identified with what is all,
 then by the act of self-intellection he has the simultaneous
 intellection of all: in such a case self-intuition by personal
 activity brings the intellection, not merely of the self, but also
 of the total therein embraced; and similarly the intuition of the
 total of things brings that of the personal self as included among
 all.
 
 But such a process would appear to introduce into the 
 Intellectual
 that element of change against which we ourselves have only now been
 protesting?
 
 The answer is that, while unchangeable identity is essential to
 the Intellectual-Principle, the soul, lying so to speak on 
 the borders
 of the Intellectual Realm, is amenable to change; it has, 
 for example,
 its inward advance, and obviously anything that attains position
 near to something motionless does so by a change directed 
 towards that
 unchanging goal and is not itself motionless in the same degree. Nor
 is it really change to turn from the self to the constituents of
 self or from those constituents to the self; and in this case the
 contemplator is the total; the duality has become unity.
 
 None the less the soul, even in the Intellectual Realm, is under
 the dispensation of a variety confronting it and a content 
 of its own?
 
 No: once pure in the Intellectual, it too possesses that same
 unchangeableness: for it possesses identity of essence; when it is
 in that region it must of necessity enter into oneness with the
 Intellectual-Principle by the sheer fact of its self-orientation,
 for by that intention all interval disappears; the soul advances and
 is taken into unison, and in that association becomes one with the
 Intellectual-Principle- but not to its own destruction: the two are
 one, and two. In such a state there is no question of stage and
 change: the soul, without motion [but by right of its 
 essential being]
 would be intent upon its intellectual act, and in possession,
 simultaneously, of its self-awareness; for it has become one
 simultaneous existence with the Supreme.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. But it leaves that conjunction; it cannot suffer that 
 unity; it
 falls in love with its own powers and possessions, and desires to
 stand apart; it leans outward so to speak: then, it appears 
 to acquire
 a memory of itself.
 
 In this self-memory a distinction is to be made; the memory
 dealing with the Intellectual Realm upbears the soul, not to 
 fall; the
 memory of things here bears it downwards to this universe; the
 intermediate memory dealing with the heavenly sphere holds it there
 too; and, in all its memory, the thing it has in mind it is and
 grows to; for this bearing-in-mind must be either intuition [i.e.,
 knowledge with identity] or representation by image: and the imaging
 in the case of the is not a taking in of something but is vision and
 condition- so much so, that, in its very sense- sight, it is 
 the lower
 in the degree in which it penetrates the object. Since its
 possession of the total of things is not primal but 
 secondary, it does
 not become all things perfectly [in becoming identical with 
 the All in
 the Intellectual]; it is of the boundary order, situated between two
 regions, and has tendency to both.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. In that realm it has also vision, through the
 Intellectual-Principle, of The Good which does not so hold to itself
 as not to reach the soul; what intervenes between them is 
 not body and
 therefore is no hindrance- and, indeed, where bodily forms do
 intervene there is still access in many ways from the primal to the
 tertiaries.
 
 If, on the contrary, the soul gives itself to the inferior, the
 same principle of penetration comes into play, and it possesses
 itself, by memory and imagination, of the thing it desired: and
 hence the memory, even dealing with the highest, is not the highest.
 Memory, of course, must be understood not merely of what might be
 called the sense of remembrance, but so as to include a condition
 induced by the past experience or vision. There is such a thing as
 possessing more powerfully without consciousness than in full
 knowledge; with full awareness the possession is of something quite
 distinct from the self; unconscious possession runs very close to
 identity, and any such approach to identification with the 
 lower means
 the deeper fall of the soul.
 
 If the soul, on abandoning its place in the Supreme, revives its
 memories of the lower, it must have in some form possessed them even
 there though the activity of the beings in that realm kept them in
 abeyance: they could not be in the nature of impressions permanently
 adopted- a notion which would entail absurdities- but were no more
 than a potentiality realized after return. When that energy of the
 Intellectual world ceases to tell upon the soul, it sees what it saw
 in the earlier state before it revisited the Supreme.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. But this power which determines memory is it also the 
 principle
 by which the Supreme becomes effective in us?
 
 At any time when we have not been in direct vision of 
 that sphere,
 memory is the source of its activity within us; when we have 
 possessed
 that vision, its presence is due to the principle by which we
 enjoyed it: this principle awakens where it wakens; and it alone has
 vision in that order; for this is no matter to be brought to 
 us by way
 of analogy, or by the syllogistic reasoning whose grounds lie
 elsewhere; the power which, even here, we possess of discoursing
 upon the Intellectual Beings is vested, as we show, in that
 principle which alone is capable of their contemplation. 
 That, we must
 awaken, so to speak, and thus attain the vision of the Supreme, as
 one, standing on some lofty height and lifting his eyes, sees what
 to those that have not mounted with him is invisible.
 
 Memory, by this account, commences after the soul has left the
 higher spheres; it is first known in the celestial period.
 
 A soul that has descended from the Intellectual region to the
 celestial and there comes to rest, may very well be understood to
 recognize many other souls known in its former state supposing that,
 as we have said, it retains recollection of much that it knew here.
 This recognition would be natural if the bodies with which 
 those souls
 are vested in the celestial must reproduce the former appearance;
 supposing the spherical form [of the stars inhabited by souls in the
 mid-realm] means a change of appearance, recognition would go by
 character, by the distinctive quality of personality: this is not
 fantastic; conditions changing need not mean a change of 
 character. If
 the souls have mutual conversation, this too would mean recognition.
 
 But those whose descent from the Intellectual is complete, how
 is it with them?
 
 They will recall their memories, of the same things, but 
 with less
 force than those still in the celestial, since they have had other
 experiences to remember, and the lapse of time will have utterly
 obliterated much of what was formerly present to them.
 
 But what way of remembering the Supreme is left if the souls
 have turned to the sense-known kosmos, and are to fall into this
 sphere of process?
 
 They need not fall to the ultimate depth: their downward
 movement may be checked at some one moment of the way; and as long
 as they have not touched the lowest of the region of process [the
 point at which non-being begins] there is nothing to prevent them
 rising once more.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. Souls that descend, souls that change their state- 
 these, then,
 may be said to have memory, which deals with what has come and gone;
 but what subjects of remembrance can there be for souls whose lot is
 to remain unchanged?
 
 The question touches memory in the stars in general, and also in
 the sun and moon and ends by dealing with the soul of the 
 All, even by
 audaciously busying itself with the memories of Zeus himself. The
 enquiry entails the examination and identification of acts of
 understanding and of reasoning in these beings, if such acts take
 place.
 
 Now if, immune from all lack, they neither seek nor doubt, and
 never learn, nothing being absent at any time from their knowledge-
 what reasonings, what processes of rational investigation, can take
 place in them, what acts of the understanding?
 
 Even as regards human concerns they have no need for observation
 or method; their administration of our affairs and of earth's in
 general does not go so; the right ordering, which is their 
 gift to the
 universe, is effected by methods very different.
 
 In other words, they have seen God and they do not remember?
 
 Ah, no: it is that they see God still and always, and that, as
 long as they see, they cannot tell themselves they have had the
 vision; such reminiscence is for souls that have lost it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Well but can they not tell themselves that yesterday, or last
 year, they moved round the earth, that they lived yesterday or at
 any given moment in their lives?
 
 Their living is eternal, and eternity is an unchanging unity. To
 identify a yesterday or a last year in their movement would be like
 isolating the movement of one of the feet, and finding a this or a
 that and an entire series in what is a single act. The 
 movement of the
 celestial beings is one movement: it is our measuring that 
 presents us
 with many movements, and with distinct days determined by
 intervening nights: There all is one day; series has no place; no
 yesterday, no last year.
 
 Still: the space traversed is different; there are the various
 sections of the Zodiac: why, then, should not the soul say "I have
 traversed that section and now I am in this other?" If, 
 also, it looks
 down over the concerns of men, must it not see the changes 
 that befall
 them, that they are not as they were, and, by that observation, that
 the beings and the things concerned were otherwise formerly? And
 does not that mean memory?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. But, we need not record in memory all we see; mere incidental
 concomitants need not occupy the imagination; when things vividly
 present to intuition, or knowledge, happen to occur in concrete
 form, it is not necessary- unless for purposes of a strictly 
 practical
 administration- to pass over that direct acquaintance, and 
 fasten upon
 the partial sense-presentation, which is already known in the larger
 knowledge, that of the Universe.
 
 I will take this point by point:
 
 First: it is not essential that everything seen should be laid
 up in the mind; for when the object is of no importance, or of no
 personal concern, the sensitive faculty, stimulated by the 
 differences
 in the objects present to vision, acts without accompaniment of the
 will, and is alone in entertaining the impression. The soul does not
 take into its deeper recesses such differences as do not meet any of
 its needs, or serve any of its purposes. Above all, when the soul's
 act is directed towards another order, it must utterly reject the
 memory of such things, things over and done with now, and not even
 taken into knowledge when they were present.
 
 On the second point: circumstances, purely accidental, need
 not be present to the imaging faculty, and if they do so appear they
 need not be retained or even observed, and in fact the impression of
 any such circumstance does not entail awareness. Thus in local
 movement, if there is no particular importance to us in the fact
 that we pass through first this and then that portion of air, or
 that we proceed from some particular point, we do not take notice,
 or even know it as we walk. Similarly, if it were of no importance
 to us to accomplish any given journey, mere movement in the air
 being the main concern, we would not trouble to ask at what 
 particular
 point of place we were, or what distance we had traversed; if we
 have to observe only the act of movement and not its 
 duration, nothing
 to do which obliges us to think of time, the minutes are not
 recorded in our minds.
 
 And finally, it is of common knowledge that, when the
 understanding is possessed of the entire act undertaken and has no
 reason to foresee any departure from the normal, it will no longer
 observe the detail; in a process unfailingly repeated without
 variation, attention to the unvarying detail is idleness.
 
 So it is with the stars. They pass from point to point, but they
 move on their own affairs and not for the sake of traversing 
 the space
 they actually cover; the vision of the things that appear on the
 way, the journey by, nothing of this is their concern: their passing
 this or that is of accident not of essence, and their intention is
 to greater objects: moreover each of them journeys, unchangeably,
 the same unchanging way; and again, there is no question to them of
 the time they spend in any given section of the journey, even
 supposing time division to be possible in the case. All this
 granted, nothing makes it necessary that they should have any memory
 of places or times traversed. Besides this life of the ensouled
 stars is one identical thing [since they are one in the All-Soul] so
 that their very spatial movement is pivoted upon identity 
 and resolves
 itself into a movement not spatial but vital, the movement 
 of a single
 living being whose act is directed to itself, a being which to
 anything outside is at rest, but is in movement by dint of the inner
 life it possesses, the eternal life. Or we may take the comparison
 of the movement of the heavenly bodies to a choral dance; if we
 think of it as a dance which comes to rest at some given period, the
 entire dance, accomplished from beginning to end, will be perfect
 while at each partial stage it was imperfect: but if the dance is a
 thing of eternity, it is in eternal perfection. And if it is in
 eternal perfection, it has no points of time and place at which it
 will achieve perfection; it will, therefore, have no concern about
 attaining to any such points: it will, therefore, make no 
 measurements
 of time or place; it will have, therefore, no memory of time and
 place.
 
 If the stars live a blessed life in their vision of the life
 inherent in their souls, and if, by force of their souls' tendency
 to become one, and by the light they cast from themselves upon the
 entire heavens, they are like the strings of a lyre which, being
 struck in tune, sing a melody in some natural scale... if this is
 the way the heavens, as one, are moved, and the component parts in
 their relation to the whole- the sidereal system moving as one, and
 each part in its own way, to the same purpose, though each, too,
 hold its own place- then our doctrine is all the more surely
 established; the life of the heavenly bodies is the more clearly an
 unbroken unity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. But Zeus- ordering all, governor, guardian and disposer,
 possessor for ever of the kingly soul and the kingly intellect,
 bringing all into being by his providence, and presiding over all
 things as they come, administering all under plan and system,
 unfolding the periods of the kosmos, many of which stand already
 accomplished- would it not seem inevitable that, in this
 multiplicity of concern, Zeus should have memory of all the periods,
 their number and their differing qualities? Contriving the future,
 co-ordinating, calculating for what is to be, must he not surely be
 the chief of all in remembering, as he is chief in producing?
 
 Even this matter of Zeus' memory of the kosmic periods is
 difficult; it is a question of their being numbered, and of his
 knowledge of their number. A determined number would mean 
 that the All
 had a beginning in time [which is not so]; if the periods are
 unlimited, Zeus cannot know the number of his works.
 
 The answer is that he will know all to be one thing existing in
 virtue of one life for ever: it is in this sense that the All is
 unlimited, and thus Zeus' knowledge of it will not be as of
 something seen from outside but as of something embraced in true
 knowledge, for this unlimited thing is an eternal indweller within
 himself- or, to be more accurate, eternally follows upon him- and is
 seen by an indwelling knowledge; Zeus knows his own unlimited life,
 and, in that knowledge knows the activity that flows from him to the
 kosmos; but he knows it in its unity not in its process.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. The ordering principle is twofold; there is the principle
 known to us as the Demiurge and there is the Soul of the 
 All; we apply
 the appellation "Zeus" sometimes to the Demiurge and sometimes to
 the principle conducting the universe.
 
 When under the name of Zeus we are considering the Demiurge we
 must leave out all notions of stage and progress, and recognize one
 unchanging and timeless life.
 
 But the life in the kosmos, the life which carries the leading
 principle of the universe, still needs elucidation; does it operate
 without calculation, without searching into what ought to be done?
 
 Yes: for what must be stands shaped before the kosmos, and is
 ordered without any setting in order: the ordered things are merely
 the things that come to be; and the principle that brings them into
 being is Order itself; this production is an act of a soul 
 linked with
 an unchangeably established wisdom whose reflection in that soul is
 Order. It is an unchanging wisdom, and there can therefore be no
 changing in the soul which mirrors it, not sometimes turned towards
 it, and sometimes away from it- and in doubt because it has turned
 away- but an unremitting soul performing an unvarying task.
 
 The leading principle of the universe is a unity- and one that
 is sovereign without break, not sometimes dominant and sometimes
 dominated. What source is there for any such multiplicity of leading
 principles as might result in contest and hesitation? And this
 governing unity must always desire the one thing: what could bring
 it to wish now for this and now for that, to its own greater
 perplexing? But observe: no perplexity need follow upon any
 development of this soul essentially a unity. The All stands a
 multiple thing no doubt, having parts, and parts dashing with parts,
 but that does not imply that it need be in doubt as to its conduct:
 that soul does not take its essence from its ultimates or from its
 parts, but from the Primals; it has its source in the First and
 thence, along an unhindered path, it flows into a total of things,
 conferring grace, and, because it remains one same thing occupied in
 one task, dominating. To suppose it pursuing one new object after
 another is to raise the question whence that novelty comes 
 into being;
 the soul, besides, would be in doubt as to its action; its very
 work, the kosmos, would be the less well done by reason of the
 hesitancy which such calculations would entail.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. The administration of the kosmos is to be thought of as that
 of a living unit: there is the action determined by what is
 external, and has to do with the parts, and there is that determined
 by the internal and by the principle: thus a doctor basing his
 treatment on externals and on the parts directly affected will often
 be baffled and obliged to all sorts of calculation, while Nature
 will act on the basis of principle and need no deliberation. 
 And in so
 far as the kosmos is a conducted thing, its administration and its
 administrator will follow not the way of the doctor but the way of
 Nature.
 
 And in the case of the universe, the administration is all the
 less complicated from the fact that the soul actually circumscribes,
 as parts of a living unity, all the members which it 
 conducts. For all
 the Kinds included in the universe are dominated by one Kind, upon
 which they follow, fitted into it, developing from it, growing out
 of it, just as the Kind manifested in the bough is related 
 to the Kind
 in the tree as a whole.
 
 What place, then, is there for reasoning, for calculation, what
 place for memory, where wisdom and knowledge are eternal,
 unfailingly present, effective, dominant, administering in an
 identical process?
 
 The fact that the product contains diversity and difference does
 not warrant the notion that the producer must be subject to
 corresponding variations. On the contrary, the more varied the
 product, the more certain the unchanging identity of the producer:
 even in the single animal the events produced by Nature are many and
 not simultaneous; there are the periods, the developments at fixed
 epochs- horns, beard, maturing breasts, the acme of life, 
 procreation-
 but the principles which initially determined the nature of the
 being are not thereby annulled; there is process of growth, but no
 diversity in the initial principle. The identity underlying all the
 multiplicity is confirmed by the fact that the principle
 constituting the parent is exhibited unchanged, undiminished, in the
 offspring. We have reason, then, for thinking that one and the same
 wisdom envelops both, and that this is the unalterable wisdom of the
 kosmos taken as a whole; it is manifold, diverse and yet simplex,
 presiding over the most comprehensive of living beings, and 
 in no wise
 altered within itself by this multiplicity, but stably one
 Reason-Principle, the concentrated totality of things: if it were
 not thus all things, it would be a wisdom of the later and partial,
 not the wisdom of the Supreme.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. It may be urged that all the multiplicity and development
 are the work of Nature, but that, since there is wisdom within the
 All, there must be also, by the side of such natural operation, acts
 of reasoning and of memory.
 
 But this is simply a human error which assumes wisdom to be what
 in fact is unwisdom, taking the search for wisdom to be 
 wisdom itself.
 For what can reasoning be but a struggle, the effort to discover the
 wise course, to attain the principle which is true and derives from
 real-being? To reason is like playing the cithara for the sake of
 achieving the art, like practising with a view to mastery, like any
 learning that aims at knowing. What reasoners seek, the wise hold:
 wisdom, in a word, is a condition in a being that possesses repose.
 Think what happens when one has accomplished the reasoning 
 process: as
 soon as we have discovered the right course, we cease to reason: we
 rest because we have come to wisdom. If then we are to range the
 leading principle of the All among learners, we must allow it
 reasonings, perplexities and those acts of memory which link the
 past with the present and the future: if it is to be considered as a
 knower, then the wisdom within it consists in a rest possessing the
 object [absolved, therefore, from search and from remembrance].
 
 Again, if the leading principle of the universe knows the future
 as it must- then obviously it will know by what means that future is
 to come about; given this knowledge, what further need is 
 there of its
 reasoning towards it, or confronting past with present? And, of
 course, this knowledge of things to come- admitting it to exist- is
 not like that of the diviners; it is that of the actual causing
 principles holding the certainty that the thing will exist, the
 certainty inherent in the all-disposers, above perplexity and
 hesitancy; the notion is constituent and therefore unvarying. The
 knowledge of future things is, in a word, identical with that of the
 present; it is a knowledge in repose and thus a knowledge 
 transcending
 the processes of cogitation.
 
 If the leading principle of the universe does not know the
 future which it is of itself to produce, it cannot produce with
 knowledge or to purpose; it will produce just what happens to come,
 that is to say by haphazard. As this cannot be, it must 
 create by some
 stable principle; its creations, therefore, will be shaped in the
 model stored up in itself; there can be no varying, for, if there
 were, there could also be failure.
 
 The produced universe will contain difference, but its 
 diversities
 spring not from its own action but from its obedience to superior
 principles which, again, spring from the creating power, so that all
 is guided by Reason-Principles in their series; thus the creating
 power is in no sense subjected to experimenting, to perplexity, to
 that preoccupation which to some minds makes the 
 administration of the
 All seem a task of difficulty. Preoccupation would obviously 
 imply the
 undertaking of alien tasks, some business- that would mean- not
 completely within the powers; but where the power is sovereign and
 sole, it need take thought of nothing but itself and its own will,
 which means its own wisdom, since in such a being the will is
 wisdom. Here, then, creating makes no demand, since the wisdom that
 goes to it is not sought elsewhere, but is the creator's very self,
 drawing on nothing outside- not, therefore, on reasoning or 
 on memory,
 which are handlings of the external.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. But what is the difference between the Wisdom thus
 conducting the universe and the principle known as Nature?
 
 This Wisdom is a first [within the All-Soul] while Nature is a
 last: for Nature is an image of that Wisdom, and, as a last in the
 soul, possesses only the last of the Reason-Principle: we may
 imagine a thick waxen seal, in which the imprint has 
 penetrated to the
 very uttermost film so as to show on both sides, sharp cut on the
 upper surface, faint on the under. Nature, thus, does not know, it
 merely produces: what it holds it passes, automatically, to its
 next; and this transmission to the corporeal and material
 constitutes its making power: it acts as a thing warmed, 
 communicating
 to what lies in next contact to it the principle of which it is the
 vehicle so as to make that also warm in some less degree.
 
 Nature, being thus a mere communicator, does not possess even
 the imaging act. There is [within the Soul] intellection, superior
 to imagination; and there is imagination standing midway between
 that intellection and the impression of which alone Nature 
 is capable.
 For Nature has no perception or consciousness of anything; 
 imagination
 [the imaging faculty] has consciousness of the external, for it
 enables that which entertains the image to have knowledge of the
 experience encountered, while Nature's function is to engender- of
 itself though in an act derived from the active principle [of the
 soul].
 
 Thus the Intellectual-Principle possesses: the Soul of the All
 eternally receives from it; this is the soul's life; its 
 consciousness
 is its intellection of what is thus eternally present to it; what
 proceeds from it into Matter and is manifested there is Nature, with
 which- or even a little before it- the series of real being comes to
 an end, for all in this order are the ultimates of the intellectual
 order and the beginnings of the imitative.
 
 There is also the decided difference that Nature operates toward
 soul, and receives from it: soul, near to Nature but superior,
 operates towards Nature but without receiving in turn; and there is
 the still higher phase [the purely Intellectual] with no action
 whatever upon body or upon Matter.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. Of the corporeal thus brought into being by Nature the
 elemental materials of things are its very produce, but how do
 animal and vegetable forms stand to it?
 
 Are we to think of them as containers of Nature present within
 them?
 
 Light goes away and the air contains no trace of it, for 
 light and
 air remain each itself, never coalescing: is this the relation of
 Nature to the formed object?
 
 It is rather that existing between fire and the object it has
 warmed: the fire withdrawn, there remains a certain warmth, distinct
 from that in the fire, a property, so to speak, of the object
 warmed. For the shape which Nature imparts to what it has 
 moulded must
 be recognized as a form quite distinct from Nature itself, though it
 remains a question to be examined whether besides this 
 [specific] form
 there is also an intermediary, a link connecting it with Nature, the
 general principle.
 
 The difference between Nature and the Wisdom described 
 as dwelling
 in the All has been sufficiently dealt with.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. But there is a difficulty affecting this entire settlement:
 Eternity is characteristic of the Intellectual-Principle, time of
 the soul- for we hold that time has its substantial being in the
 activity of the soul, and springs from soul- and, since time is a
 thing of division and comports a past, it would seem that 
 the activity
 producing it must also be a thing of division, and that its
 attention to that past must imply that even the All-Soul has memory?
 We repeat, identity belongs to the eternal, time must be the 
 medium of
 diversity; otherwise there is nothing to distinguish them,
 especially since we deny that the activities of the soul can
 themselves experience change.
 
 Can we escape by the theory that, while human souls- receptive
 of change, even to the change of imperfection and lack- are in time,
 yet the Soul of the All, as the author of time, is itself timeless?
 But if it is not in time, what causes it to engender time rather
 than eternity?
 
 The answer must be that the realm it engenders is not that of
 eternal things but a realm of things enveloped in time: it is just
 as the souls [under, or included in, the All-Soul] are not in time,
 but some of their experiences and productions are. For a soul is
 eternal, and is before time; and what is in time is of a lower order
 than time itself: time is folded around what is in time 
 exactly as- we
 read- it is folded about what is in place and in number.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. But if in the soul thing follows thing, if there is earlier
 and later in its productions, if it engenders or creates in 
 time, then
 it must be looking towards the future; and if towards the 
 future, then
 towards the past as well?
 
 No: prior and past are in the things its produces; in itself
 nothing is past; all, as we have said, is one simultaneous 
 grouping of
 Reason-Principles. In the engendered, dissimilarity is not
 compatible with unity, though in the Reason-Principles supporting
 the engendered such unity of dissimilars does occur- hand 
 and foot are
 in unity in the Reason-Principle [of man], but apart in the realm of
 sense. Of course, even in that ideal realm there is apartness, but
 in a characteristic mode, just as in a mode, there is priority.
 
 Now, apartness may be explained as simply 
 differentiation: but how
 account for priority unless on the assumption of some ordering
 principle arranging from above, and in that disposal necessarily
 affirming a serial order?
 
 There must be such a principle, or all would exist 
 simultaneously;
 but the indicated conclusion does not follow unless order 
 and ordering
 principle are distinct; if the ordering principle is Primal Order,
 there is no such affirmation of series; there is simply making, the
 making of this thing after that thing. The affirmation would imply
 that the ordering principle looks away towards Order and therefore
 is not, itself, Order.
 
 But how are Order and this orderer one and the same?
 
 Because the ordering principle is no conjoint of matter and idea
 but is soul, pure idea, the power and energy second only to the
 Intellectual-Principle: and because the succession is a fact of the
 things themselves, inhibited as they are from this comprehensive
 unity. The ordering soul remains august, a circle, as we may figure
 it, in complete adaptation to its centre, widening outward, but fast
 upon it still, an outspreading without interval.
 
 The total scheme may be summarized in the illustration 
 of The Good
 as a centre, the Intellectual-Principle as an unmoving circle, the
 Soul as a circle in motion, its moving being its aspiration: the
 Intellectual-Principle possesses and has ever embraced that which is
 beyond being; the soul must seek it still: the sphere of the 
 universe,
 by its possession of the soul thus aspirant, is moved to the
 aspiration which falls within its own nature; this is no more than
 such power as body may have, the mode of pursuit possible where the
 object pursued is debarred from entrance; it is the motion of
 coiling about, with ceaseless return upon the same path- in other
 words, it is circuit.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. But how comes it that the intuitions and the 
 Reason-Principles
 of the soul are not in the same timeless fashion within 
 ourselves, but
 that here the later of order is converted into a later of time-
 bringing in all these doubts?
 
 Is it because in us the governing and the answering 
 principles are
 many and there is no sovereign unity?
 
 That condition; and, further, the fact that our mental acts fall
 into a series according to the succession of our needs, being not
 self-determined but guided by the variations of the 
 external: thus the
 will changes to meet every incident as each fresh need arises and as
 the external impinges in its successive things and events.
 
 A variety of governing principles must mean variety in the
 images formed upon the representative faculty, images not 
 issuing from
 one internal centre, but, by difference of origin and of acting-
 point, strange to each other, and so bringing compulsion to bear
 upon the movements and efficiencies of the self.
 
 When the desiring faculty is stirred, there is a presentment of
 the object- a sort of sensation, in announcement and in picture, of
 the experience- calling us to follow and to attain: the personality,
 whether it resists or follows and procures, is necessarily thrown
 out of equilibrium. The same disturbance is caused by passion urging
 revenge and by the needs of the body; every other sensation or
 experience effects its own change upon our mental attitude; 
 then there
 is the ignorance of what is good and the indecision of a 
 soul [a human
 soul] thus pulled in every direction; and, again, the interaction of
 all these perplexities gives rise to yet others.
 
 But do variations of judgement affect that very highest in us?
 
 No: the doubt and the change of standard are of the Conjoint [of
 the soul-phase in contact with body]; still, the right reason of
 that highest is weaker by being given over to inhabit this mingled
 mass: not that it sinks in its own nature: it is much as amid the
 tumult of a public meeting the best adviser speaks but fails to
 dominate; assent goes to the roughest of the brawlers and roarers,
 while the man of good counsel sits silent, ineffectual, 
 overwhelmed by
 the uproar of his inferiors.
 
 The lowest human type exhibits the baser nature; the man is a
 compost calling to mind inferior political organization: in the
 mid-type we have a citizenship in which some better section sways a
 demotic constitution not out of control: in the superior 
 type the life
 is aristocratic; it is the career of one emancipated from what is a
 base in humanity and tractable to the better; in the finest type,
 where the man has brought himself to detachment, the ruler is one
 only, and from this master principle order is imposed upon the rest,
 so that we may think of a municipality in two sections, the superior
 city and, kept in hand by it, the city of the lower elements.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. There remains the question whether the body possesses any
 force of its own- so that, with the incoming of the soul, it lives
 in some individuality- or whether all it has is this Nature we have
 been speaking of, the superior principle which enters into relations
 with it.
 
 Certainly the body, container of soul and of nature, cannot even
 in itself be as a soulless form would be: it cannot even be like air
 traversed by light; it must be like air storing heat: the 
 body holding
 animal or vegetive life must hold also some shadow of soul; and it
 is body thus modified that is the seat of corporeal pains and
 pleasures which appear before us, the true human being, in such a
 way as to produce knowledge without emotion. By "us, the true human
 being" I mean the higher soul for, in spite of all, the modified
 body is not alien but attached to our nature and is a concern to us
 for that reason: "attached," for this is not ourselves nor yet are
 we free of it; it is an accessory and dependent of the human being;
 "we" means the master-principle; the conjoint, similarly is 
 in its own
 way an "ours"; and it is because of this that we care for 
 its pain and
 pleasure, in proportion as we are weak rather than strong, gripped
 rather than working towards detachment.
 
 The other, the most honourable phase of our being, is what we
 think of as the true man and into this we are penetrating.
 
 Pleasure and pain and the like must not be attributed to the
 soul alone, but to the modified body and to something intermediary
 between soul and body and made up of both. A unity is independent:
 thus body alone, a lifeless thing, can suffer no hurt- in its
 dissolution there is no damage to the body, but merely to its unity-
 and soul in similar isolation cannot even suffer dissolution, and by
 its very nature is immune from evil.
 
 But when two distinct things become one in an artificial unity,
 there is a probable source of pain to them in the mere fact that
 they were inapt to partnership. This does not, of course, 
 refer to two
 bodies; that is a question of one nature; and I am speaking of two
 natures. When one distinct nature seeks to associate itself with
 another, a different, order of being- the lower participating in the
 higher, but unable to take more than a faint trace of it- then the
 essential duality becomes also a unity, but a unity standing midway
 between what the lower was and what it cannot absorb, and therefore
 a troubled unity; the association is artificial and uncertain,
 inclining now to this side and now to that in ceaseless vacillation;
 and the total hovers between high and low, telling, downward bent,
 of misery but, directed to the above, of longing for unison.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 19
 
 19. Thus what we know as pleasure and pain may be 
 identified: pain
 is our perception of a body despoiled, deprived of the image of the
 soul; pleasure our perception of the living frame in which the image
 of the soul is brought back to harmonious bodily operation. The
 painful experience takes place in that living frame; but the
 perception of it belongs to the sensitive phase of the soul, 
 which, as
 neighbouring the living body, feels the change and makes it known to
 the principle, the imaging faculty, into which the sensations
 finally merge; then the body feels the pain, or at least the body is
 affected: thus in an amputation, when the flesh is cut the cutting
 is an event within the material mass; but the pain felt in that mass
 is there felt because it is not a mass pure and simple, but a mass
 under certain [non-material] conditions; it is to that modified
 substance that the sting of the pain is present, and the 
 soul feels it
 by an adoption due to what we think of as proximity.
 
 And, itself unaffected, it feels the corporeal 
 conditions at every
 point of its being, and is thereby enabled to assign every condition
 to the exact spot at which the wound or pain occurs. Being present
 as a whole at every point of the body, if it were itself affected
 the pain would take it at every point, and it would suffer as one
 entire being, so that it could not know, or make known, the spot
 affected; it could say only that at the place of its presence there
 existed pain- and the place of its presence is the entire 
 human being.
 As things are, when the finger pains the man is in pain 
 because one of
 his members is in pain; we class him as suffering, from his finger
 being painful, just as we class him as fair from his eyes being blue.
 
 But the pain itself is in the part affected unless we include in
 the notion of pain the sensation following upon it, in which case we
 are saying only that distress implies the perception of distress.
 But [this does not mean that the soul is affected] we cannot
 describe the perception itself as distress; it is the 
 knowledge of the
 distress and, being knowledge, is not itself affected, or it 
 could not
 know and convey a true message: a messenger, affected, overwhelmed
 by the event, would either not convey the message or not convey it
 faithfully.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 20
 
 20. As with bodily pain and pleasure so with the bodily desires;
 their origin, also, must be attributed to what thus stands midway,
 to that Nature we described as the corporeal.
 
 Body undetermined cannot be imagined to give rise to appetite
 and purpose, nor can pure soul be occupied about sweet and 
 bitter: all
 this must belong to what is specifically body but chooses to be
 something else as well, and so has acquired a restless movement
 unknown to the soul and by that acquisition is forced to aim at a
 variety of objects, to seek, as its changing states demand, sweet or
 bitter, water or warmth, with none of which it could have any
 concern if it remained untouched by life.
 
 In the case of pleasure and pain we showed how upon distress
 follows the knowledge of it, and that the soul, seeking to alienate
 what is causing the condition, inspires a withdrawal which the
 member primarily affected has itself indicated, in its own mode, by
 its contraction. Similarly in the case of desire: there is the
 knowledge in the sensation [the sensitive phase of the soul] and in
 the next lower phase, that described as the "Nature" which 
 carries the
 imprint of the soul to the body; that Nature knows the fully formed
 desire which is the culmination of the less formed desire in body;
 sensation knows the image thence imprinted upon the Nature; and from
 the moment of the sensation the soul, which alone is competent, acts
 upon it, sometimes procuring, sometimes on the contrary resisting,
 taking control and paying heed neither to that which originated the
 desire nor to that which subsequently entertained it.
 
 But why, thus, two phases of desire; why should not the body as
 a determined entity [the living total] be the sole desirer?
 
 Because there are [in man] two distinct things, this Nature and
 the body, which, through it, becomes a living being: the Nature
 precedes the determined body which is its creation, made and 
 shaped by
 it; it cannot originate the desires; they must belong to the living
 body meeting the experiences of this life and seeking in its
 distress to alter its state, to substitute pleasure for pain,
 sufficiency for want: this Nature must be like a mother reading the
 wishes of a suffering child, and seeking to set it right and to
 bring it back to herself; in her search for the remedy she attaches
 herself by that very concern to the sufferer's desire and makes the
 child's experience her own.
 
 In sum, the living body may be said to desire of its own 
 motion in
 a fore-desiring with, perhaps, purpose as well; Nature desires for,
 and because of, that living body; granting or withholding belongs to
 another again, the higher soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 21
 
 21. That this is the phase of the human being in which desire
 takes its origin is shown by observation of the different stages of
 life; in childhood, youth, maturity, the bodily desires 
 differ; health
 or sickness also may change them, while the [psychic] faculty is of
 course the same through all: the evidence is clear that the 
 variety of
 desire in the human being results from the fact that he is a 
 corporeal
 entity, a living body subject to every sort of vicissitude.
 
 The total movement of desire is not always stirred
 simultaneously with what we call the impulses to the 
 satisfaction even
 of the lasting bodily demands; it may refuse assent to the idea of
 eating or drinking until reason gives the word: this shows us
 desire- the degree of it existing in the living body- advancing
 towards some object, with Nature [the lower soul-phase] refusing its
 co-operation and approval, and as sole arbiter between what is
 naturally fit and unfit, rejecting what does not accord with the
 natural need.
 
 We may be told that the changing state of the body is sufficient
 explanation of the changing desires in the faculty; but that would
 require the demonstration that the changing condition of a given
 entity could effect a change of desire in another, in one 
 which cannot
 itself gain by the gratification; for it is not the desiring faculty
 that profits by food, liquid, warmth, movement, or by any relief
 from overplenty or any filling of a void; all such services touch
 the body only.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 22
 
 22. And as regards vegetal forms? Are we to imagine beneath the
 leading principle [the "Nature" phase] some sort of corporeal echo
 of it, something that would be tendency or desire in us and is
 growth in them? Or are we to think that, while the earth [which
 nourishes them] contains the principle of desire by virtue of
 containing soul, the vegetal realm possesses only this latter
 reflection of desire?
 
 The first point to be decided is what soul is present in the
 earth.
 
 Is it one coming from the sphere of the All, a radiation upon
 earth from that which Plato seems to represent as the only thing
 possessing soul primarily? Or are we to go by that other 
 passage where
 he describes earth as the first and oldest of all the gods within
 the scope of the heavens, and assigns to it, as to the other stars,
 a soul peculiar to itself?
 
 It is difficult to see how earth could be a god if it did not
 possess a soul thus distinct: but the whole matter is obscure since
 Plato's statements increase or at least do not lessen the
 perplexity. It is best to begin by facing the question as a matter
 of reasoned investigation.
 
 That earth possesses the vegetal soul may be taken as 
 certain from
 the vegetation upon it. But we see also that it produces animals;
 why then should we not argue that it is itself animated? And,
 animated, no small part of the All, must it not be plausible 
 to assert
 that it possesses an Intellectual-Principle by which it 
 holds its rank
 as a god? If this is true of every one of the stars, why 
 should it not
 be so of the earth, a living part of the living All? We cannot think
 of it as sustained from without by an alien soul and incapable of
 containing one appropriate to itself.
 
 Why should those fiery globes be receptive of soul, and the
 earthly globe not? The stars are equally corporeal, and they lack
 the flesh, blood, muscle, and pliant material of earth, which,
 besides, is of more varied content and includes every form 
 of body. If
 the earth's immobility is urged in objection, the answer is that
 this refers only to spatial movement.
 
 But how can perception and sensation [implied in ensoulment] be
 supposed to occur in the earth?
 
 How do they occur in the stars? Feeling does not belong to
 fleshy matter: soul to have perception does not require 
 body; body, on
 the contrary, requires soul to maintain its being and its
 efficiency, judgement [the foundation of perception] belongs to the
 soul which overlooks the body, and, from what is experienced there,
 forms its decisions.
 
 But, we will be asked to say what are the experiences, within
 the earth, upon which the earth-soul is thus to form its decisions:
 certainly vegetal forms, in so far as they belong to earth have no
 sensation or perception: in what then, and through what, does such
 sensation take place, for sensation without organs is too rash a
 notion. Besides, what would this sense-perception profit the soul?
 It could not be necessary to knowledge: surely the consciousness of
 wisdom suffices to beings which have nothing to gain from sensation?
 
 This argument is not to be accepted: it ignores the
 consideration that, apart from all question of practical utility,
 objects of sense provide occasion for a knowing which brings 
 pleasure:
 thus we ourselves take delight in looking upon sun, stars, sky,
 landscape, for their own sake. But we will deal with this 
 point later:
 for the present we ask whether the earth has perceptions and
 sensations, and if so through what vital members these would take
 place and by what method: this requires us to examine certain
 difficulties, and above all to decide whether earth could have
 sensation without organs, and whether this would be directed to some
 necessary purpose even when incidentally it might bring other
 results as well.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 23
 
 23. A first principle is that the knowing of sensible objects is
 an act of the soul, or of the living conjoint, becoming aware of the
 quality of certain corporeal entities, and appropriating the ideas
 present in them.
 
 This apprehension must belong either to the soul isolated,
 self-acting, or to soul in conjunction with some other entity.
 
 Isolated, self-acting, how is it possible? Self-acting, it has
 knowledge of its own content, and this is not perception but
 intellection: if it is also to know things outside itself it 
 can grasp
 them only in one of two ways: either it must assimilate itself to
 the external objects, or it must enter into relations with something
 that has been so assimilated.
 
 Now as long as it remains self-centred it cannot assimilate: a
 single point cannot assimilate itself to an external line: even line
 cannot adapt itself to line in another order, line of the 
 intellectual
 to line of the sensible, just as fire of the intellectual and man of
 the intellectual remain distinct from fire and man of the sensible.
 Even Nature, the soul-phase which brings man into being, 
 does not come
 to identity with the man it shapes and informs: it has the faculty
 of dealing with the sensible, but it remains isolated, and, its task
 done, ignores all but the intellectual as it is itself ignored by
 the sensible and utterly without means of grasping it.
 
 Suppose something visible lying at a distance: the soul sees it;
 now, admitting to the full that at first only the pure idea of the
 thing is seized- a total without discerned part- yet in the end it
 becomes to the seeing soul an object whose complete detail of colour
 and form is known: this shows that there is something more here than
 the outlying thing and the soul; for the soul is immune from
 experience; there must be a third, something not thus exempt; and it
 is this intermediate that accepts the impressions of shape and the
 like.
 
 This intermediate must be able to assume the modifications of
 the material object so as to be an exact reproduction of its states,
 and it must be of the one elemental-stuff: it, thus, will exhibit
 the condition which the higher principle is to perceive; and the
 condition must be such as to preserve something of the originating
 object, and yet not be identical with it: the essential vehicle of
 knowledge is an intermediary which, as it stands between the soul
 and the originating object, will, similarly, present a condition
 midway between the two spheres, of sense and the
 intellectual-linking the extremes, receiving from one side to
 exhibit to the other, in virtue of being able to assimilate itself
 to each. As an instrument by which something is to receive
 knowledge, it cannot be identical with either the knower or 
 the known:
 but it must be apt to likeness with both- akin to the external
 object by its power of being affected, and to the internal, the
 knower, by the fact that the modification it takes becomes an idea.
 
 If this theory of ours is sound, bodily organs are necessary to
 sense-perception, as is further indicated by the reflection that the
 soul entirely freed of body can apprehend nothing in the order of
 sense.
 
 The organ must be either the body entire or some member set
 apart for a particular function; thus touch for one, vision for
 another. The tools of craftsmanship will be seen to be
 intermediaries between the judging worker and the judged object,
 disclosing to the experimenter the particular character of the
 matter under investigation: thus a ruler, representing at once the
 straightness which is in the mind and the straightness of a plank,
 is used as an intermediary by which the operator proves his work.
 
 Some questions of detail remain for consideration 
 elsewhere: Is it
 necessary that the object upon which judgement or perception is to
 take place should be in contact with the organ of perception, or can
 the process occur across space upon an object at a distance? Thus,
 is the heat of a fire really at a distance from the flesh it warms,
 the intermediate space remaining unmodified; is it possible to see
 colour over a sheer blank intervening between the colour and the
 eye, the organ of vision reaching to its object by its own power?
 
 For the moment we have one certainty, that perception of 
 things of
 sense belongs to the embodied soul and takes place through the body.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 24
 
 24. The next question is whether perception is concerned 
 only with
 need.
 
 The soul, isolated, has no sense-perception; sensations go with
 the body; sensation itself therefore must occur by means of the body
 to which the sensations are due; it must be something 
 brought about by
 association with the body.
 
 Thus either sensation occurs in a soul compelled to follow upon
 bodily states- since every graver bodily experience reaches 
 at last to
 soul- or sensation is a device by which a cause is dealt with before
 it becomes so great as actually to injure us or even before it has
 begun to make contact.
 
 At this, sense-impressions would aim at utility. They may serve
 also to knowledge, but that could be service only to some being not
 living in knowledge but stupefied as the result of a 
 disaster, and the
 victim of a Lethe calling for constant reminding: they would be
 useless to any being free from either need or forgetfulness. 
 This This
 reflection enlarges the enquiry: it is no longer a question of earth
 alone, but of the whole star-system, all the heavens, the kosmos
 entire. For it would follow that, in the sphere of things not exempt
 from modification, sense-perception would occur in every part having
 relation to any other part: in a whole, however- having relation
 only to itself, immune, universally self-directed and 
 self-possessing-
 what perception could there be?
 
 Granted that the percipient must act through an organ and that
 this organ must be different from the object perceived, then the
 universe, as an All, can have [no sensation since it has] no organ
 distinct from object: it can have self-awareness, as we have; but
 sense-perception, the constant attendant of another order, it cannot
 have.
 
 Our own apprehension of any bodily condition apart from 
 the normal
 is the sense of something intruding from without: but 
 besides this, we
 have the apprehension of one member by another; why then should not
 the All, by means of what is stationary in it, perceive that 
 region of
 itself which is in movement, that is to say the earth and the
 earth's content?
 
 Things of earth are certainly affected by what passes in other
 regions of the All; what, then, need prevent the All from having, in
 some appropriate way, the perception of those changes? In addition
 to that self-contemplating vision vested in its stationary part, may
 it not have a seeing power like that of an eye able to 
 announce to the
 All-Soul what has passed before it? Even granted that it is entirely
 unaffected by its lower, why, still, should it not see like an eye,
 ensouled as it is, all lightsome?
 
 Still: "eyes were not necessary to it," we read. If this meant
 simply that nothing is left to be seen outside of the All, 
 still there
 is the inner content, and there can be nothing to prevent it seeing
 what constitutes itself: if the meaning is that such 
 self-vision could
 serve to no use, we may think that it has vision not as a main
 intention for vision's sake but as a necessary concomitant of its
 characteristic nature; it is difficult to conceive why such a body
 should be incapable of seeing.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 25
 
 25. But the organ is not the only requisite to vision or to
 perception of any kind: there must be a state of the soul 
 inclining it
 towards the sphere of sense.
 
 Now it is the soul's character to be ever in the Intellectual
 sphere, and even though it were apt to sense-perception, this could
 not accompany that intention towards the highest; to ourselves when
 absorbed in the Intellectual, vision and the other acts of sense are
 in abeyance for the time; and, in general, any special 
 attention blurs
 every other. The desire of apprehension from part to part- a subject
 examining itself- is merely curiosity even in beings of our own
 standing, and, unless for some definite purpose, is waste of energy:
 and the desire to apprehend something external- for the sake of a
 pleasant sight- is the sign of suffering or deficiency.
 
 Smelling, tasting flavours [and such animal perceptions] may
 perhaps be described as mere accessories, distractions of the soul,
 while seeing and hearing would belong to the sun and the other
 heavenly bodies as incidentals to their being. This would not be
 unreasonable if seeing and hearing are means by which they apply
 themselves to their function.
 
 But if they so apply themselves, they must have memory; it is
 impossible that they should have no remembrance if they are to be
 benefactors, their service could not exist without memory.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 26
 
 26. Their knowledge of our prayers is due to what we may call an
 enlinking, a determined relation of things fitted into a system; so,
 too, the fulfillment of the petitions; in the art of magic all looks
 to this enlinkment: prayer and its answer, magic and its success,
 depend upon the sympathy of enchained forces.
 
 This seems to oblige us to accord sense-perception to the earth.
 
 But what perception?
 
 Why not, to begin with, that of contact-feeling, the
 apprehension of part by part, the apprehension of fire by the rest
 of the entire mass in a sensation transmitted upwards to the earth's
 leading principle? A corporeal mass [such as that of the 
 earth] may be
 sluggish but is not utterly inert. Such perceptions, of course,
 would not be of trifles, but of the graver movement of things.
 
 But why even of them?
 
 Because those gravest movements could not possibly remain
 unknown where there is an immanent soul.
 
 And there is nothing against the idea that sensation in the
 earth exists for the sake of the human interests furthered by the
 earth. They would be served by means of the sympathy that has been
 mentioned; petitioners would be heard and their prayers met, 
 though in
 a way not ours. And the earth, both in its own interest and 
 in that of
 beings distinct from itself, might have the experiences of the other
 senses also- for example, smell and taste where, perhaps, 
 the scent of
 juices or sap might enter into its care for animal life, as in the
 constructing or restoring of their bodily part.
 
 But we need not demand for earth the organs by which we,
 ourselves, act: not even all the animals have these; some, without
 ears perceive sound.
 
 For sight it would not need eyes- though if light is 
 indispensable
 how can it see?
 
 That the earth contains the principle of growth must be
 admitted; it is difficult not to allow in consequence that, 
 since this
 vegetal principle is a member of spirit, the earth is 
 primarily of the
 spiritual order; and how can we doubt that in a spirit all is lucid?
 This becomes all the more evident when we reflect that, besides
 being as a spirit lightsome, it is physically illuminated moving in
 the light of kosmic revolution.
 
 There is, thus, no longer any absurdity or impossibility in the
 notion that the soul in the earth has vision: we must, further,
 consider that it is the soul of no mean body; that in fact 
 it is a god
 since certainly soul must be everywhere good.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 27
 
 27. If the earth transmits the generative soul to growing
 things- or retains it while allowing a vestige of it to 
 constitute the
 vegetal principle in them- at once the earth is ensouled, as 
 our flesh
 is, and any generative power possessed by the plant world is of its
 bestowing: this phase of the soul is immanent in the body of the
 growing thing, and transmits to it that better element by which it
 differs from the broken off part no longer a thing of growth but a
 mere lump of material.
 
 But does the entire body of the earth similarly receive anything
 from the soul?
 
 Yes: for we must recognize that earthly material broken off from
 the main body differs from the same remaining continuously attached;
 thus stones increase as long as they are embedded, and, from the
 moment they are separated, stop at the size attained.
 
 We must conclude, then, that every part and member of the earth
 carries its vestige of this principle of growth, an under-phase of
 that entire principle which belongs not to this or that member but
 to the earth as a whole: next in order is the nature [the 
 soul-phase],
 concerned with sensation, this not interfused [like the vegetal
 principle] but in contact from above: then the higher soul and the
 Intellectual-Principle, constituting together the being known as
 Hestia [Earth-Mind] and Demeter [Earth-Soul]- a nomenclature
 indicating the human intuition of these truths, asserted in the
 attribution of a divine name and nature.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 28
 
 28. Thus much established, we may return on our path: we have to
 discuss the seat of the passionate element in the human being.
 
 Pleasures and pains- the conditions, that is, not the perception
 of them- and the nascent stage of desire, we assigned to the 
 body as a
 determined thing, the body brought, in some sense, to life: are we
 entitled to say the same of the nascent stage of passion? Are we to
 consider passion in all its forms as vested in the determined body
 or in something belonging to it, for instance in the heart 
 or the bile
 necessarily taking condition within a body not dead? Or are we to
 think that just as that which bestows the vestige of the soul is a
 distinct entity, so we may reason in this case- the 
 passionate element
 being one distinct thing, itself, and not deriving from any 
 passionate
 or percipient faculty?
 
 Now in the first case the soul-principle involved, the vegetal,
 pervades the entire body, so that pain and pleasure and 
 nascent desire
 for the satisfaction of need are present all over it- there is
 possibly some doubt as to the sexual impulse, which, however, it may
 suffice to assign to the organs by which it is executed- but in
 general the region about the liver may be taken to be the starting
 point of desire, since it is the main acting point of the vegetal
 principle which transmits the vestige phase of the soul to the liver
 and body- the seat, because the spring.
 
 But in this other case, of passion, we have to settle what it
 is, what form of soul it represents: does it act by communicating a
 lower phase of itself to the regions round the heart, or is it set
 in motion by the higher soul-phase impinging upon the Conjoint [the
 animate-total], or is there, in such conditions no question of
 soul-phase, but simply passion itself producing the act or state of
 [for example] anger?
 
 Evidently the first point for enquiry is what passion is.
 
 Now we all know that we feel anger not only over our own bodily
 suffering, but also over the conduct of others, as when some of our
 associates act against our right and due, and in general over any
 unseemly conduct. It is at once evident that anger implies some
 subject capable of sensation and of judgement: and this
 consideration suffices to show that the vegetal nature is not its
 source, that we must look for its origin elsewhere.
 
 On the other hand, anger follows closely upon bodily states;
 people in whom the blood and the bile are intensely active are as
 quick to anger as those of cool blood and no bile are slow; animals
 grow angry though they pay attention to no outside 
 combinations except
 where they recognize physical danger; all this forces us again to
 place the seat of anger in the strictly corporeal element, the
 principle by which the animal organism is held together. Similarly,
 that anger or its first stirring depends upon the condition of the
 body follows from the consideration that the same people are more
 irritable ill than well, fasting than after food: it would seem that
 the bile and the blood, acting as vehicles of life, produce these
 emotions.
 
 Our conclusion [reconciling with these corporeal facts 
 the psychic
 or mental element indicated] will identify, first, some suffering in
 the body answered by a movement in the blood or in the bile: 
 sensation
 ensues and the soul, brought by means of the representative 
 faculty to
 partake in the condition of the affected body, is directed 
 towards the
 cause of the pain: the reasoning soul, in turn, from its place above
 the phase not inbound with body-acts in its own mode when the breach
 of order has become manifest to it: it calls in the alliance of that
 ready passionate faculty which is the natural combatant of the evil
 disclosed.
 
 Thus anger has two phases; there is firstly that which, rising
 apart from all process of reasoning, draws reason to itself by the
 medium of the imaging faculty, and secondly that which, rising in
 reason, touches finally upon the specific principle of the emotion.
 Both these depend upon the existence of that principle of 
 vegetal life
 and generation by which the body becomes an organism aware 
 of pleasure
 and pain: this principle it was that made the body a thing 
 of bile and
 bitterness, and thus it leads the indwelling soul-phase to
 corresponding states- churlish and angry under stress of
 environment- so that being wronged itself, it tries, as we 
 may put it,
 to return the wrong upon its surroundings, and bring them to the
 same condition.
 
 That this soul-vestige, which determines the movements of
 passion is of one essence [con-substantial] with the other is
 evident from the consideration that those of us less avid of 
 corporeal
 pleasures, especially those that wholly repudiate the body, are the
 least prone to anger and to all experiences not rising from reason.
 
 That this vegetal principle, underlying anger, should be present
 in trees and yet passion be lacking in them cannot surprise us since
 they are not subject to the movements of blood and bile. If the
 occasions of anger presented themselves where there is no power of
 sensation there could be no more than a physical ebullition with
 something approaching to resentment [an unconscious reaction]; where
 sensation exists there is at once something more; the recognition of
 wrong and of the necessary defence carries with it the intentional
 act.
 
 But the division of the unreasoning phase of the soul into a
 desiring faculty and a passionate faculty- the first identical with
 the vegetal principle, the second being a lower phase of it acting
 upon the blood or bile or upon the entire living organism- such a
 division would not give us a true opposition, for the two would
 stand in the relation of earlier phase to derivative.
 
 This difficulty is reasonably met by considering that both
 faculties are derivatives and making the division apply to them in
 so far as they are new productions from a common source; for the
 division applies to movements of desire as such, not to the essence
 from which they rise.
 
 That essence is not, of its own nature, desire; it is, however,
 the force which by consolidating itself with the active
 manifestation proceeding from it makes the desire a completed thing.
 And that derivative which culminates in passion may not unreasonably
 be thought of as a vestige-phase lodged about the heart, since the
 heart is not the seat of the soul, but merely the centre to that
 portion of the blood which is concerned in the movements of passion.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 29
 
 29. But- keeping to our illustration, by which the body is
 warmed by soul and not merely illuminated by it- how is it that when
 the higher soul withdraws there is no further trace of the vital
 principle?
 
 For a brief space there is; and, precisely, it begins to 
 fade away
 immediately upon the withdrawal of the other, as in the case 
 of warmed
 objects when the fire is no longer near them: similarly hair 
 and nails
 still grow on the dead; animals cut to pieces wriggle for a good
 time after; these are signs of a life force still indwelling.
 
 Besides, simultaneous withdrawal would not prove the identity of
 the higher and lower phases: when the sun withdraws there 
 goes with it
 not merely the light emanating from it, guided by it, attached to
 it, but also at once that light seen upon obliquely situated
 objects, a light secondary to the sun's and cast upon things outside
 of its path [reflected light showing as colour]; the two are not
 identical and yet they disappear together.
 
 But is this simultaneous withdrawal or frank obliteration?
 
 The question applies equally to this secondary light and to the
 corporeal life, that life which we think of as being completely sunk
 into body.
 
 No light whatever remains in the objects once illuminated; that
 much is certain; but we have to ask whether it has sunk back into
 its source or is simply no longer in existence.
 
 How could it pass out of being, a thing that once has been?
 
 But what really was it? We must remember that what we know as
 colour belongs to bodies by the fact that they throw off light, yet
 when corruptible bodies are transformed the colour disappears and we
 no more ask where the colour of a burned-out fire is than where its
 shape is.
 
 Still: the shape is merely a configuration, like the lie of the
 hands clenched or spread; the colour is no such accidental 
 but is more
 like, for example, sweetness: when a material substance 
 breaks up, the
 sweetness of what was sweet in it, and the fragrance of what was
 fragrant, may very well not be annihilated, but enter into some
 other substance, passing unobserved there because the new habitat is
 not such that the entrant qualities now offer anything solid to
 perception.
 
 May we not think that, similarly, the light belonging to bodies
 that have been dissolved remains in being while the solid total,
 made up of all that is characteristic, disappears?
 
 It might be said that the seeing is merely the sequel to some
 law [of our own nature], so that what we call qualities do not
 actually exist in the substances.
 
 But this is to make the qualities indestructible and not 
 dependent
 upon the composition of the body; it would no longer be the
 Reason-Principles within the sperm that produce, for instance, the
 colours of a bird's variegated plumage; these principles would
 merely blend and place them, or if they produced them would draw
 also on the full store of colours in the sky, producing in the
 sense, mainly, of showing in the formed bodies something very
 different from what appears in the heavens.
 
 But whatever we may think on this doubtful point, if, as long as
 the bodies remain unaltered, the light is constant and 
 unsevered, then
 it would seem natural that, on the dissolution of the body, 
 the light-
 both that in immediate contact and any other attached to that-
 should pass away at the same moment, unseen in the going as in the
 coming.
 
 But in the case of the soul it is a question whether the 
 secondary
 phases follow their priors- the derivatives their sources- or
 whether every phase is self-governing, isolated from its
 predecessors and able to stand alone; in a word, whether no part of
 the soul is sundered from the total, but all the souls are
 simultaneously one soul and many, and, if so, by what mode; this
 question, however, is treated elsewhere.
 
 Here we have to enquire into the nature and being of that
 vestige of the soul actually present in the living body: if there is
 truly a soul, then, as a thing never cut off from its total, it will
 go with soul as soul must: if it is rather to be thought of as
 belonging to the body, as the life of the body, we have the same
 question that rose in the case of the vestige of light; we must
 examine whether life can exist without the presence of soul, 
 except of
 course in the sense of soul living above and acting upon the remote
 object.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 30
 
 30. We have declared acts of memory unnecessary to the stars,
 but we allow them perceptions, hearing as well as seeing; for we
 said that prayers to them were heard- our supplications to the sun,
 and those, even, of certain other men to the stars. It has moreover
 been the belief that in answer to prayer they accomplish many human
 wishes, and this so lightheartedly that they become not 
 merely helpers
 towards good but even accomplices in evil. Since this matter lies in
 our way, it must be considered, for it carries with it grave
 difficulties that very much trouble those who cannot think of divine
 beings as, thus, authors or auxiliaries in unseemliness even 
 including
 the connections of loose carnality.
 
 In view of all this it is especially necessary to study the
 question with which we began, that of memory in the heavenly bodies.
 
 It is obvious that, if they act on our prayers and if this
 action is not immediate, but with delay and after long periods of
 time, they remember the prayers men address to them. This is 
 something
 that our former argument did not concede; though it appeared 
 plausible
 that, for their better service of mankind, they might have been
 endowed with such a memory as we ascribed to Demeter and 
 Hestia- or to
 the latter alone if only the earth is to be thought of as beneficent
 to man.
 
 We have, then, to attempt to show: firstly, how acts implying
 memory in the heavenly bodies are to be reconciled with our system
 as distinguished from those others which allow them memory 
 as a matter
 of course; secondly, what vindication of those gods of the heavenly
 spheres is possible in the matter of seemingly anomalous acts- a
 question which philosophy cannot ignore- then too, since the charge
 goes so far, we must ask whether credence is to be given to those
 who hold that the entire heavenly system can be put under spell by
 man's skill and audacity: our discussion will also deal with the
 spirit-beings and how they may be thought to minister to these ends-
 unless indeed the part played by the Celestials prove to be 
 settled by
 the decision upon the first questions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 31
 
 31. Our problem embraces all act and all experience 
 throughout the
 entire kosmos- whether due to nature, in the current phrase, or
 effected by art. The natural proceeds, we must hold, from the All
 towards its members and from the members to the All, or from 
 member to
 other member: the artificial either remains, as it began, within the
 limit of the art- attaining finality in the artificial product
 alone- or is the expression of an art which calls to its aid natural
 forces and agencies, and so sets up act and experience within the
 sphere of the natural.
 
 When I speak of the act and experience of the All I mean 
 the total
 effect of the entire kosmic circuit upon itself and upon its
 members: for by its motion it sets up certain states both within
 itself and upon its parts, upon the bodies that move within it and
 upon all that it communicates to those other parts of it, the things
 of our earth.
 
 The action of part upon part is manifest; there are the
 relations and operations of the sun, both towards the other spheres
 and towards the things of earth; and again relations among 
 elements of
 the sun itself, of other heavenly bodies, of earthly things and of
 things in the other stars, demand investigation.
 
 As for the arts: Such as look to house building and the like are
 exhausted when that object is achieved; there are again those-
 medicine, farming, and other serviceable pursuits- which deal
 helpfully with natural products, seeking to bring them to natural
 efficiency; and there is a class- rhetoric, music and every other
 method of swaying mind or soul, with their power of modifying for
 better or for worse- and we have to ascertain what these arts come
 to and what kind of power lies in them.
 
 On all these points, in so far as they bear on our present
 purpose, we must do what we can to work out some approximate
 explanation.
 
 It is abundantly evident that the Circuit is a cause; it 
 modifies,
 firstly, itself and its own content, and undoubtedly also it tells
 on the terrestrial, not merely in accordance with bodily conditions
 but also by the states of the soul it sets up; and each of 
 its members
 has an operation upon the terrestrial and in general upon all the
 lower.
 
 Whether there is a return action of the lower upon the 
 higher need
 not trouble us now: for the moment we are to seek, as far as
 discussion can exhibit it, the method by which action takes 
 place; and
 we do not challenge the opinions universally or very generally
 entertained.
 
 We take the question back to the initial act of causation. It
 cannot be admitted that either heat or cold and the like what are
 known as the primal qualities of the elements- or any admixture of
 these qualities, should be the first causes we are seeking; equally
 inacceptable, that while the sun's action is all by heat, there is
 another member of the Circuit operating wholly by cold- 
 incongruous in
 the heavens and in a fiery body- nor can we think of some other star
 operating by liquid fire.
 
 Such explanations do not account for the differences of things,
 and there are many phenomena which cannot be referred to any of
 these causes. Suppose we allow them to be the occasion of moral
 differences- determined, thus, by bodily composition and
 constitution under a reigning heat or cold- does that give us a
 reasonable explanation of envy, jealously, acts of violence? 
 Or, if it
 does, what, at any rate, are we to think of good and bad 
 fortune, rich
 men and poor, gentle blood, treasure-trove?
 
 An immensity of such examples might be adduced, all leading far
 from any corporeal quality that could enter the body and soul of a
 living thing from the elements: and it is equally impossible that
 the will of the stars, a doom from the All, any deliberation among
 them, should be held responsible for the fate of each and 
 all of their
 inferiors. It is not to be thought that such beings engage
 themselves in human affairs in the sense of making men thieves,
 slave-dealers, burglars, temple-strippers, or debased effeminates
 practising and lending themselves to disgusting actions: that is not
 merely unlike gods; it is unlike mediocre men; it is, 
 perhaps, beneath
 the level of any existing being where there is not the least
 personal advantage to be gained.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 32
 
 32. If we can trace neither to material agencies [blind
 elements] nor to any deliberate intention the influences from
 without which reach to us and to the other forms of life and to the
 terrestrial in general, what cause satisfactory to reason remains?
 
 The secret is: firstly, that this All is one universally
 comprehensive living being, encircling all the living beings within
 it, and having a soul, one soul, which extends to all its members in
 the degree of participant membership held by each; secondly, that
 every separate thing is an integral part of this All by belonging to
 the total material fabric- unrestrictedly a part by bodily 
 membership,
 while, in so far as it has also some participation in the All. Soul,
 it possesses in that degree spiritual membership as well, perfect
 where participation is in the All-Soul alone, partial where there is
 also a union with a lower soul.
 
 But, with all this gradation, each several thing is affected by
 all else in virtue of the common participation in the All, and to
 the degree of its own participation.
 
 This One-All, therefore, is a sympathetic total and stands as
 one living being; the far is near; it happens as in one animal with
 its separate parts: talon, horn, finger, and any other member are
 not continuous and yet are effectively near; intermediate parts feel
 nothing, but at a distant point the local experience is known.
 Correspondent things not side by side but separated by others placed
 between, the sharing of experience by dint of like condition- this
 is enough to ensure that the action of any distant member be
 transmitted to its distant fellow. Where all is a living 
 thing summing
 to a unity there is nothing so remote in point of place as not to be
 near by virtue of a nature which makes of the one living being a
 sympathetic organism.
 
 Where there is similarity between a thing affected and the thing
 affecting it, the affection is not alien; where the 
 affecting cause is
 dissimilar the affection is alien and unpleasant.
 
 Such hurtful action of member upon member within one living
 being need not seem surprising: within ourselves, in our own
 activities, one constituent can be harmed by another; bile and
 animal spirit seem to press and goad other members of the 
 human total:
 in the vegetal realm one part hurts another by sucking the moisture
 from it. And in the All there is something analogous to bile and
 animal spirit, as to other such constituents. For visibly it is not
 merely one living organism; it is also a manifold. In virtue of the
 unity the individual is preserved by the All: in virtue of the
 multiplicity of things having various contacts, difference often
 brings about mutual hurt; one thing, seeking its own need, is
 detrimental to another; what is at once related and different is
 seized as food; each thing, following its own natural path, wrenches
 from something else what is serviceable to itself, and destroys or
 checks in its own interest whatever is becoming a menace to it:
 each, occupied with its peculiar function, assists no doubt anything
 able to profit by that, but harms or destroys what is too weak to
 withstand the onslaught of its action, like fire withering things
 round it or greater animals in their march thrusting aside or
 trampling under foot the smaller.
 
 The rise of all these forms of being and their modification,
 whether to their loss or gain, all goes to the fulfillment of the
 natural unhindered life of that one living being: for it was not
 possible for the single thing to be as if it stood alone; the final
 purpose could not serve to that only end, intent upon the 
 partial: the
 concern must be for the whole to which each item is member: 
 things are
 different both from each other and in their own stages, therefore
 cannot be complete in one unchanging form of life; nor could
 anything remain utterly without modification if the All is to be
 durable; for the permanence of an All demands varying forms.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 33
 
 33. The Circuit does not go by chance but under the
 Reason-Principle of the living whole; therefore there must be a
 harmony between cause and caused; there must be some order ranging
 things to each other's purpose, or in due relation to each other:
 every several configuration within the Circuit must be accompanied
 by a change in the position and condition of things 
 subordinate to it,
 which thus by their varied rhythmic movement make up one total
 dance-play.
 
 In our dance-plays there are outside elements contributing to
 the total effect- fluting, singing, and other linked accessories-
 and each of these changes in each new movement: there is no need to
 dwell on these; their significance is obvious. But besides this
 there is the fact that the limbs of the dancer cannot possibly keep
 the same positions in every figure; they adapt themselves to 
 the plan,
 bending as it dictates, one lowered, another raised, one active,
 another resting as the set pattern changes. The dancer's mind is on
 his own purpose; his limbs are submissive to the dance-movement
 which they accomplish to the end, so that the connoisseur can
 explain that this or that figure is the motive for the lifting,
 bending, concealment, effacing, of the various members of the body;
 and in all this the executant does not choose the particular motions
 for their own sake; the whole play of the entire person dictates the
 necessary position to each limb and member as it serves to the plan.
 
 Now this is the mode in which the heavenly beings [the diviner
 members of the All] must be held to be causes wherever they have any
 action, and, when. they do not act, to indicate.
 
 Or, a better statement: the entire kosmos puts its entire life
 into act, moving its major members with its own action and 
 unceasingly
 setting them in new positions; by the relations thus established, of
 these members to each other and to the whole, and by the different
 figures they make together, the minor members in turn are brought
 under the system as in the movements of some one living 
 being, so that
 they vary according to the relations, positions, configurations: the
 beings thus co-ordinated are not the causes; the cause is the
 coordinating All; at the same time it is not to be thought of as
 seeking to do one thing and actually doing another, for there is
 nothing external to it since it is the cause by actually 
 being all: on
 the one side the configurations, on the other the inevitable effects
 of those configurations upon a living being moving as a unit and,
 again, upon a living being [an All] thus by its nature conjoined and
 concomitant and, of necessity, at once subject and object to its own
 activities.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 34
 
 34. For ourselves, while whatever in us belongs to the 
 body of the
 All should be yielded to its action, we ought to make sure that we
 submit only within limits, realizing that the entire man is not thus
 bound to it: intelligent servitors yield a part of 
 themselves to their
 masters but in part retain their personality, and are thus less
 absolutely at beck and call, as not being slaves, not utterly
 chattels.
 
 The changing configurations within the All could not fail to be
 produced as they are, since the moving bodies are not of equal speed.
 
 Now the movement is guided by a Reason-Principle; the 
 relations of
 the living whole are altered in consequence; here in our own 
 realm all
 that happens reacts in sympathy to the events of that higher sphere:
 it becomes, therefore, advisable to ask whether we are to think of
 this realm as following upon the higher by agreement, or to
 attribute to the configurations the powers underlying the events,
 and whether such powers would be vested in the configurations simply
 or in the relations of the particular items.
 
 It will be said that one position of one given thing has by no
 means an identical effect- whether of indication or of causation- in
 its relation to another and still less to any group of others, since
 each several being seems to have a natural tendency [or receptivity]
 of its own.
 
 The truth is that the configuration of any given group means
 merely the relationship of the several parts, and, changing the
 members, the relationship remains the same.
 
 But, this being so, the power will belong, not to the positions
 but to the beings holding those positions?
 
 To both taken together. For as things change their relations,
 and as any one thing changes place, there is a change of power.
 
 But what power? That of causation or of indication?
 
 To this double thing- the particular configuration of particular
 beings- there accrues often the twofold power, that of causation and
 that of indication, but sometimes only that of indication. 
 Thus we are
 obliged to attribute powers both to the configuration and to the
 beings entering into them. In mime dancers each of the hands has its
 own power, and so with all the limbs; the relative positions 
 have much
 power; and, for a third power, there is that of the accessories and
 concomitants; underlying the action of the performers' limbs, there
 are such items as the clutched fingers and the muscles and veins
 following suit.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 35
 
 35. But we must give some explanation of these powers. The
 matter requires a more definite handling. How can there be a
 difference of power between one triangular configuration and another?
 
 How can there be the exercise of power from man to man; 
 under what
 law, and within what limits?
 
 The difficulty is that we are unable to attribute 
 causation either
 to the bodies of the heavenly beings or to their wills: their bodies
 are excluded because the product transcends the causative power of
 body, their will because it would be unseemly to suppose 
 divine beings
 to produce unseemliness.
 
 Let us keep in mind what we have laid down:
 
 The being we are considering is a living unity and, therefore,
 necessarily self-sympathetic: it is under a law of reason, and
 therefore the unfolding process of its life must be self-accordant:
 that life has no haphazard, but knows only harmony and ordinance:
 all the groupings follow reason: all single beings within it, all
 the members of this living whole in their choral dance are under a
 rule of Number.
 
 Holding this in mind we are forced to certain conclusions: in
 the expressive act of the All are comprised equally the 
 configurations
 of its members and these members themselves, minor as well as major
 entering into the configurations. This is the mode of life 
 of the All;
 and its powers work together to this end under the Nature in 
 which the
 producing agency within the Reason-Principles has brought them into
 being. The groupings [within the All] are themselves in the nature
 of Reason-Principles since they are the out-spacing of a 
 living-being,
 its reason-determined rhythms and conditions, and the entities thus
 spaced-out and grouped to pattern are its various members: then
 again there are the powers of the living being- distinct these, too-
 which may be considered as parts of it, always excluding deliberate
 will which is external to it, not contributory to the nature of the
 living All.
 
 The will of any organic thing is one; but the distinct powers
 which go to constitute it are far from being one: yet all the
 several wills look to the object aimed at by the one will of the
 whole: for the desire which the one member entertains for 
 another is a
 desire within the All: a part seeks to acquire something outside
 itself, but that external is another part of which it feels the
 need: the anger of a moment of annoyance is directed to something
 alien, growth draws on something outside, all birth and becoming has
 to do with the external; but all this external is inevitably 
 something
 included among fellow members of the system: through these its limbs
 and members, the All is bringing this activity into being while in
 itself it seeks- or better, contemplates- The Good. Right will,
 then, the will which stands above accidental experience, seeks The
 Good and thus acts to the same end with it. When men serve another,
 many of their acts are done under order, but the good servant is the
 one whose purpose is in union with his master's.
 
 In all the efficacy of the sun and other stars upon earthly
 matters we can but believe that though the heavenly body is intent
 upon the Supreme yet- to keep to the sun- its warming of terrestrial
 things, and every service following upon that, all springs from
 itself, its own act transmitted in virtue of soul, the vastly
 efficacious soul of Nature. Each of the heavenly bodies, similarly,
 gives forth a power, involuntary, by its mere radiation: all things
 become one entity, grouped by this diffusion of power, and so bring
 about wide changes of condition; thus the very groupings have power
 since their diversity produces diverse conditions; that the grouped
 beings themselves have also their efficiency is clear since they
 produce differently according to the different membership of the
 groups.
 
 That configuration has power in itself is within our own
 observation here. Why else do certain groupments, in 
 contradistinction
 to others, terrify at sight though there has been no previous
 experience of evil from them? If some men are alarmed by a
 particular groupment and others by quite a different one, the reason
 can be only that the configurations themselves have efficacy, each
 upon a certain type- an efficacy which cannot fail to reach anything
 naturally disposed to be impressed by it, so that in one groupment
 things attract observation which in another pass without effect.
 
 If we are told that beauty is the motive of attraction, does not
 this mean simply that the power of appeal to this or that 
 mind depends
 upon pattern, configuration? How can we allow power to 
 colour and none
 to configuration? It is surely untenable that an entity should have
 existence and yet have no power to effect: existence carries with it
 either acting or answering to action, some beings having 
 action alone,
 others both.
 
 At the same time there are powers apart from pattern: and, in
 things of our realm, there are many powers dependent not 
 upon heat and
 cold but upon forces due to differing properties, forces which have
 been shaped to ideal-quality by the action of Reason-Principles and
 communicate in the power of Nature: thus the natural properties of
 stones and the efficacy of plants produce many astonishing results.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 36
 
 36. The Universe is immensely varied, the container of all the
 Reason-Principles and of infinite and diverse efficacies. In man, we
 are told, the eye has its power, and the bones have their varied
 powers, and so with each separate part of hand and of foot; and
 there is no member or organ without its own definite function, some
 separate power of its own- a diversity of which we can have no
 notion unless our studies take that direction. What is true of man
 must be true of the universe, and much more, since all this order is
 but a representation of the higher: it must contain an untellably
 wonderful variety of powers, with which, of course, the bodies
 moving through the heavens will be most richly endowed.
 
 We cannot think of the universe as a soulless habitation,
 however vast and varied, a thing of materials easily told 
 off, kind by
 kind- wood and stone and whatever else there be, all blending into a
 kosmos: it must be alert throughout, every member living by its own
 life, nothing that can have existence failing to exist within it.
 
 And here we have the solution of the problem, "How an ensouled
 living form can include the soulless": for this account allows
 grades of living within the whole, grades to some of which we deny
 life only because they are not perceptibly self-moved: in the truth,
 all of these have a hidden life; and the thing whose life is 
 patent to
 sense is made up of things which do not live to sense, but, none the
 less, confer upon their resultant total wonderful powers towards
 living. Man would never have reached to his actual height if the
 powers by which he acts were the completely soulless elements of his
 being; similarly the All could not have its huge life unless 
 its every
 member had a life of its own; this however does not necessarily
 imply a deliberate intention; the All has no need of intention to
 bring about its acts: it is older than intention, and therefore its
 powers have many servitors.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 37
 
 37. We must not rob the universe of any factor in its being. If
 any of our theorists of to-day seek to explain the action of fire-
 or of any other such form, thought of as an agent- they will find
 themselves in difficulties unless they recognize the act to be the
 object's function in the All, and give a like explanation of other
 natural forces in common use.
 
 We do not habitually examine or in any way question the 
 normal: we
 set to doubting and working out identifications when we are 
 confronted
 by any display of power outside everyday experience: we wonder at a
 novelty and we wonder at the customary when anyone brings 
 forward some
 single object and explains to our ignorance the efficacy 
 vested in it.
 
 Some such power, not necessarily accompanied by reason, every
 single item possesses; for each has been brought into being and into
 shape within a universe; each in its kind has partaken of 
 soul through
 the medium of the ensouled All, as being embraced by that definitely
 constituted thing: each then is a member of an animate being 
 which can
 include nothing that is less than a full member [and therefore a
 sharer in the total of power]- though one thing is of mightier
 efficacy than another, and, especially members of the heavenly
 system than the objects of earth, since they draw upon a 
 purer nature-
 and these powers are widely productive. But productivity does not
 comport intention in what appears to be the source of the thing
 accomplished: there is efficacy, too, where there is no will: even
 attention is not necessary to the communication of power; the very
 transmission of soul may proceed without either.
 
 A living being, we know, may spring from another without any
 intention, and as without loss so without consciousness in the
 begetter: in fact any intention the animal exercised could be a
 cause of propagation only on condition of being identical with the
 animal [i.e., the theory would make intention a propagative animal,
 not a mental act?]
 
 And, if intention is unnecessary to the propagation of life,
 much more so is attention.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 38
 
 38. Whatever springs automatically from the All out of that
 distinctive life of its own, and, in addition to that self-moving
 activity, whatever is due to some specific agency- for example, to
 prayers, simple or taking the form of magic incantations- this
 entire range of production is to be referred, not to each such
 single cause, but to the nature of the thing produced [i.e., to a
 certain natural tendency in the product to exist with its own
 quality].
 
 All that forwards life or some other useful purpose is to be
 ascribed to the transmission characteristic of the All; it is
 something flowing from the major of an integral to its 
 minor. Where we
 think we see the transmission of some force unfavourable to the
 production of living beings, the flaw must be found in the inability
 of the subject to take in what would serve it: for what happens does
 not happen upon a void; there is always specific form and quality;
 anything that could be affected must have an underlying nature
 definite and characterized. The inevitable blendings, further, have
 their constructive effect, every element adding something 
 contributory
 to the life. Then again some influence may come into play at the
 time when the forces of a beneficent nature are not acting: the
 co-ordination of the entire system of things does not always allow
 to each several entity everything that it needs: and further we
 ourselves add a great deal to what is transmitted to us.
 
 None the less all entwines into a unity: and there is something
 wonderful in the agreement holding among these various things of
 varied source, even of sources frankly opposite; the secret lies in
 a variety within a unity. When by the standard of the better kind
 among things of process anything falls short- the reluctance of its
 material substratum having prevented its perfect shaping under idea-
 it may be thought of as being deficient in that noble element whose
 absence brings to shame: the thing is a blend, something due to the
 high beings, an alloy from the underlying nature, something added by
 the self.
 
 Because all is ever being knit, all brought to culmination in
 unity, therefore all events are indicated; but this does not make
 virtue a matter of compulsion; its spontaneity is equally 
 inwoven into
 the ordered system by the general law that the things of this sphere
 are pendant from the higher, that the content of our universe lies
 in the hands of the diviner beings in whom our world is participant.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 39
 
 39. We cannot, then, refer all that exists to Reason-Principles
 inherent in the seed of things [Spermatic Reasons]; the 
 universe is to
 be traced further back, to the more primal forces, to the principles
 by which that seed itself takes shape. Such spermatic principles
 cannot be the containers of things which arise independently of
 them, such as what enters from Matter [the reasonless] into 
 membership
 of the All, or what is due to the mere interaction of existences.
 
 No: the Reason-Principle of the universe would be better 
 envisaged
 as a wisdom uttering order and law to a state, in full knowledge of
 what the citizens will do and why, and in perfect adaptation 
 of law to
 custom; thus the code is made to thread its way in and out 
 through all
 their conditions and actions with the honour or infamy 
 earned by their
 conduct; and all coalesces by a kind of automatism.
 
 The signification which exists is not a first intention; 
 it arises
 incidentally by the fact that in a given collocation the members
 will tell something of each other: all is unity sprung of unity and
 therefore one thing is known by way of another other, a cause in the
 light of the caused, the sequent as rising from its precedent, the
 compound from the constituents which must make themselves 
 known in the
 linked total.
 
 If all this is sound, at once our doubts fall and we need no
 longer ask whether the transmission of any evil is due to the gods.
 
 For, in sum: Firstly, intentions are not to be considered as the
 operative causes; necessities inherent in the nature of 
 things account
 for all that comes from the other realm; it is a matter of the
 inevitable relation of parts, and, besides, all is the 
 sequence to the
 living existence of a unity. Secondly, there is the large 
 contribution
 made by the individual. Thirdly, each several communication, good in
 itself, takes another quality in the resultant combination.
 Fourthly, the life in the kosmos does not look to the individual but
 to the whole. Finally, there is Matter, the underlie, which being
 given one thing receives it as something else, and is unable to make
 the best of what it takes.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 40
 
 40. But magic spells; how can their efficacy be explained?
 
 By the reigning sympathy and by the fact in Nature that there is
 an agreement of like forces and an opposition of unlike, and by the
 diversity of those multitudinous powers which converge in the one
 living universe.
 
 There is much drawing and spell-binding dependent on no
 interfering machination; the true magic is internal to the All, its
 attractions and, not less, its repulsions. Here is the primal mage
 and sorcerer- discovered by men who thenceforth turn those same
 ensorcellations and magic arts upon one another.
 
 Love is given in Nature; the qualities inducing love 
 induce mutual
 approach: hence there has arisen an art of magic love-drawing whose
 practitioners, by the force of contact implant in others a new
 temperament, one favouring union as being informed with love; they
 knit soul to soul as they might train two separate trees towards
 each other. The magician too draws on these patterns of power, and
 by ranging himself also into the pattern is able tranquilly 
 to possess
 himself of these forces with whose nature and purpose he has become
 identified. Supposing the mage to stand outside the All, his
 evocations and invocations would no longer avail to draw up 
 or to call
 down; but as things are he operates from no outside standground, he
 pulls knowing the pull of everything towards any other thing in the
 living system.
 
 The tune of an incantation, a significant cry, the mien of the
 operator, these too have a natural leading power over the soul upon
 which they are directed, drawing it with the force of mournful
 patterns or tragic sounds- for it is the reasonless soul, 
 not the will
 or wisdom, that is beguiled by music, a form of sorcery which raises
 no question, whose enchantment, indeed, is welcomed, 
 exacted, from the
 performers. Similarly with regard to prayers; there is no question
 of a will that grants; the powers that answer to incantations do not
 act by will; a human being fascinated by a snake has neither
 perception nor sensation of what is happening; he knows only after
 he has been caught, and his highest mind is never caught. In other
 words, some influence falls from the being addressed upon the
 petitioner- or upon someone else- but that being itself, sun or
 star, perceives nothing of it all.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 41
 
 41. The prayer is answered by the mere fact that part and other
 part are wrought to one tone like a musical string which, plucked at
 one end, vibrates at the other also. Often, too, the sounding of one
 string awakens what might pass for a perception in another, 
 the result
 of their being in harmony and tuned to one musical scale; now, if
 the vibration in a lyre affects another by virtue of the sympathy
 existing between them, then certainly in the All- even though it is
 constituted in contraries- there must be one melodic system; for it
 contains its unisons as well, and its entire content, even to those
 contraries, is a kinship.
 
 Thus, too, whatever is hurtful to man- the passionate spirit,
 for example, drawn by the medium of the gall into the 
 principle seated
 in the liver- comes with no intention of hurt; it is simply as one
 transferring fire to another might innocently burn him: no doubt,
 since he actually set the other on fire he is a cause, but 
 only as the
 attacking fire itself is a cause, that is by the merely accidental
 fact that the person to whom the fire was being brought blundered in
 taking it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 42
 
 42. It follows that, for the purposes which have induced this
 discussion, the stars have no need of memory or of any sense of
 petitions addressed to them; they give no such voluntary attention
 to prayers as some have thought: it is sufficient that, in virtue
 simply of the nature of parts and of parts within a whole, something
 proceeds from them whether in answer to prayer or without prayer. We
 have the analogy of many powers- as in some one living organism-
 which, independently of plan or as the result of applied method, act
 without any collaboration of the will: one member or function is
 helped or hurt by another in the mere play of natural forces; and
 the art of doctor or magic healer will compel some one centre to
 purvey something of its own power to another centre. just so the
 All: it purveys spontaneously, but it purveys also under spell; some
 entity [acting like the healer] is concerned for a member situated
 within itself and summons the All which, then, pours in its gift; it
 gives to its own part by the natural law we have cited since the
 petitioner is no alien to it. Even though the suppliant be a sinner,
 the answering need not shock us; sinners draw from the 
 brooks; and the
 giver does not know of the gift but simply gives- though we must
 remember that all is one woof and the giving is always consonant
 with the order of the universe. There is, therefore, no necessity by
 ineluctable law that one who has helped himself to what lies open to
 all should receive his deserts then and there.
 
 In sum, we must hold that the All cannot be affected; its
 leading principle remains for ever immune whatsoever happens to its
 members; the affection is really present to them, but since nothing
 existent can be at strife with the total of existence, no such
 affection conflicts with its impassivity.
 
 Thus the stars, in so far as they are parts, can be affected and
 yet are immune on various counts; their will, like that of 
 the All, is
 untouched, just as their bodies and their characteristic natures are
 beyond all reach of harm; if they give by means of their souls,
 their souls lose nothing; their bodies remain unchanged or, if there
 is ebb or inflow, it is of something going unfelt and coming 
 unawares.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 43
 
 43. And the Proficient [the Sage], how does he stand with regard
 to magic and philtre-spells?
 
 In the soul he is immune from magic; his reasoning part cannot
 be touched by it, he cannot be perverted. But there is in him the
 unreasoning element which comes from the [material] All, and in this
 he can be affected, or rather this can be affected in him.
 Philtre-Love, however, he will not know, for that would require the
 consent of the higher soul to the trouble stiffed in the lower. And,
 just as the unreasoning element responds to the call of incantation,
 so the adept himself will dissolve those horrible powers by
 counter-incantations. Death, disease, any experience within the
 material sphere, these may result, yes; for anything that has
 membership in the All may be affected by another member, or by the
 universe of members; but the essential man is beyond harm.
 
 That the effects of magic should be not instantaneous but
 developed is only in accord with Nature's way.
 
 Even the Celestials, the Daimones, are not on their unreasoning
 side immune: there is nothing against ascribing acts of memory and
 experiences of sense to them, in supposing them to accept 
 the traction
 of methods laid up in the natural order, and to give hearing to
 petitioners; this is especially true of those of them that 
 are closest
 to this sphere, and in the degree of their concern about it.
 
 For everything that looks to another is under spell to that:
 what we look to, draws us magically. Only the self-intent go free of
 magic. Hence every action has magic as its source, and the 
 entire life
 of the practical man is a bewitchment: we move to that only which
 has wrought a fascination upon us. This is indicated where we read
 "for the burgher of greathearted Erechtheus has a pleasant face [but
 you should see him naked; then you would be cautious]." For what
 conceivably turns a man to the external? He is drawn, drawn by the
 arts not of magicians but of the natural order which administers the
 deceiving draught and links this to that, not in local contact but
 in the fellowship of the philtre.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 44
 
 44. Contemplation alone stands untouched by magic; no man
 self-gathered falls to a spell; for he is one, and that unity is all
 he perceives, so that his reason is not beguiled but holds the due
 course, fashioning its own career and accomplishing its task.
 
 In the other way of life, it is not the essential man that gives
 the impulse; it is not the reason; the unreasoning also acts as a
 principle, and this is the first condition of the misfortune. Caring
 for children, planning marriage- everything that works as 
 bait, taking
 value by dint of desire- these all tug obviously: so it is with our
 action, sometimes stirred, not reasonably, by a certain spirited
 temperament, sometimes as foolishly by greed; political 
 interests, the
 siege of office, all betray a forth-summoning lust of power; action
 for security springs from fear; action for gain, from desire; action
 undertaken for the sake of sheer necessities- that is, for supplying
 the insufficiency of nature- indicates, manifestly, the 
 cajoling force
 of nature to the safeguarding of life.
 
 We may be told that no such magic underlies good action, 
 since, at
 that, Contemplation itself, certainly a good action, implies a magic
 attraction.
 
 The answer is that there is no magic when actions recognized as
 good are performed upon sheer necessity with the 
 recollection that the
 veritable good is elsewhere; this is simply knowledge of need; it is
 not a bewitchment binding the life to this sphere or to any thing
 alien; all is permissible under duress of human nature, and in the
 spirit of adaptation to the needs of existence in general- or even
 to the needs of the individual existence, since it certainly seems
 reasonable to fit oneself into life rather than to withdraw from it.
 
 When, on the contrary, the agent falls in love with what is good
 in those actions, and, cheated by the mere track and trace of the
 Authentic Good makes them his own, then, in his pursuit of a lower
 good, he is the victim of magic. For all dalliance with what 
 wears the
 mask of the authentic, all attraction towards that mere semblance,
 tells of a mind misled by the spell of forces pulling towards
 unreality.
 
 The sorcery of Nature is at work in this; to pursue the non-good
 as a good, drawn in unreasoning impulse by its specious 
 appearance: it
 is to be led unknowing down paths unchosen; and what can we call
 that but magic.
 
 Alone in immunity from magic is he who, though drawn by the
 alien parts of his total being, withholds his assent to their
 standards of worth, recognizing the good only where his 
 authentic self
 sees and knows it, neither drawn nor pursuing, but tranquilly
 possessing and so never charmed away.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 45
 
 45. From this discussion it becomes perfectly clear that the
 individual member of the All contributes to that All in the degree
 of its kind and condition; thus it acts and is acted upon. In any
 particular animal each of the limbs and organs, in the measure of
 its kind and purpose, aids the entire being by service performed and
 counts in rank and utility: it gives what is in it its gift and
 takes from its fellows in the degree of receptive power belonging to
 its kind; there is something like a common sensitiveness linking the
 parts, and in the orders in which each of the parts is also animate,
 each will have, in addition to its rank as part, the very particular
 functions of a living being.
 
 We have learned, further, something of our human 
 standing; we know
 that we too accomplish within the All a work not confined to the
 activity and receptivity of body in relation to body; we know that
 we bring to it that higher nature of ours, linked as we are by
 affinities within us towards the answering affinities outside us;
 becoming by our soul and the conditions of our kind thus linked- or,
 better, being linked by Nature- with our next highest in the 
 celestial
 or demonic realm, and thence onwards with those above the
 Celestials, we cannot fail to manifest our quality. Still, we are
 not all able to offer the same gifts or to accept identically: if we
 do not possess good, we cannot bestow it; nor can we ever purvey any
 good thing to one that has no power of receiving good. Anyone that
 adds his evil to the total of things is known for what he is and, in
 accordance with his kind, is pressed down into the evil which he has
 made his own, and hence, upon death, goes to whatever region fits
 his quality- and all this happens under the pull of natural forces.
 
 For the good man, the giving and the taking and the changes of
 state go quite the other way; the particular tendencies of 
 the nature,
 we may put it, transpose the cords [so that we are moved by that
 only which, in Plato's metaphor of the puppets, draws towards the
 best].
 
 Thus this universe of ours is a wonder of power and wisdom,
 everything by a noiseless road coming to pass according to a 
 law which
 none may elude- which the base man never conceives though it is
 leading him, all unknowingly, to that place in the All where his lot
 must be cast- which the just man knows, and, knowing, sets out to
 the place he must, understanding, even as he begins the 
 journey, where
 he is to be housed at the end, and having the good hope that he will
 be with gods.
 
 In a living being of small scope the parts vary but slightly,
 and have but a faint individual consciousness, and, unless 
 possibly in
 a few and for a short time, are not themselves alive. But in a
 living universe, of high expanse, where every entity has vast scope
 and many of the members have life, there must be wider movement and
 greater changes. We see the sun and the moon and the other stars
 shifting place and course in an ordered progression. It is therefore
 within reason that the souls, also, of the All should have their
 changes, not retaining unbrokenly the same quality, but 
 ranged in some
 analogy with their action and experience- some taking rank 
 as head and
 some as foot in a disposition consonant with the Universal 
 Being which
 has its degrees in better and less good. A soul, which 
 neither chooses
 the highest that is here, nor has lent itself to the lowest, is one
 which has abandoned another, a purer, place, taking this sphere in
 free election.
 
 The punishments of wrong-doing are like the treatment of
 diseased parts of the body- here, medicines to knit sundered flesh;
 there, amputations; elsewhere, change of environment and condition-
 and the penalties are planned to bring health to the All by settling
 every member in the fitting place: and this health of the 
 All requires
 that one man be made over anew and another, sick here, be taken
 hence to where he shall be weakly no longer.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIFTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 PROBLEMS OF THE SOUL (3).
 
 [ALSO ENTITLED "ON SIGHT"].
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. We undertook to discuss the question whether sight is
 possible in the absence of any intervening medium, such as 
 air or some
 other form of what is known as transparent body: this is the time
 and place.
 
 It has been explained that seeing and all sense-perception can
 occur only through the medium of some bodily substance, since in the
 absence of body the soul is utterly absorbed in the Intellectual
 Sphere. Sense-perception being the gripping not of the Intellectual
 but of the sensible alone, the soul, if it is to form any 
 relationship
 of knowledge, or of impression, with objects of sense, must 
 be brought
 in some kind of contact with them by means of whatever may bridge
 the gap.
 
 The knowledge, then, is realized by means of bodily organs:
 through these, which [in the embodied soul] are almost of one growth
 with it, being at least its continuations, it comes into something
 like unity with the alien, since this mutual approach brings about a
 certain degree of identity [which is the basis of knowledge].
 
 Admitting, then, that some contact with an object is 
 necessary for
 knowing it, the question of a medium falls to the ground in the case
 of things identified by any form of touch; but in the case of sight-
 we leave hearing over for the present- we are still in 
 doubt; is there
 need of some bodily substance between the eye and the illumined
 object?
 
 No: such an intervening material may be a favouring
 circumstance, but essentially it adds nothing to seeing power.
 !    Dense bodies, such as clay, actually prevent sight; the less
 material the intervening substance is, the more clearly we see; the
 intervening substance, then, is a hindrance, or, if not 
 that, at least
 not a help.
 
 It will be objected that vision implies that whatever intervenes
 between seen and seer must first [and progressively] experience the
 object and be, as it were, shaped to it; we will be reminded that
 [vision is not a direct and single relation between agent and
 object, but is the perception of something radiated since] anyone
 facing to the object from the side opposite to ourselves sees it
 equally; we will be asked to deduce that if all the space
 intervening between seen and seer did not carry the impression of
 the object we could not receive it.
 
 But all the need is met when the impression reaches that which
 is adapted to receive it; there is no need for the intervening space
 to be impressed. If it is, the impression will be of quite another
 order: the rod between the fisher's hand and the torpedo fish is not
 affected in the same way as the hand that feels the shock. And yet
 there too, if rod and line did not intervene, the hand would not be
 affected- though even that may be questioned, since after all the
 fisherman, we are told, is numbed if the torpedo merely lies in his
 net.
 
 The whole matter seems to bring us back to that sympathy of
 which we have treated. If a certain thing is of a nature to be
 sympathetically affected by another in virtue of some similitude
 between them, then anything intervening, not sharing in that
 similitude, will not be affected, or at least not similarly. If this
 be so, anything naturally disposed to be affected will take the
 impression more vividly in the absence of intervening substance,
 even of some substance capable, itself, of being affected.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. If sight depends upon the linking of the light of vision with
 the light leading progressively to the illumined object, then, by
 the very hypothesis, one intervening substance, the light, is
 indispensable: but if the illuminated body, which is the object of
 vision, serves as an agent operating certain changes, some 
 such change
 might very well impinge immediately upon the eye, requiring 
 no medium;
 this all the more, since as things are the intervening substance,
 which actually does exist, is in some degree changed at the point of
 contact with the eye [and so cannot be in itself a requisite to
 vision].
 
 Those who have made vision a forth-going act [and not an 
 in-coming
 from the object] need not postulate an intervening substance-
 unless, indeed, to provide against the ray from the eye 
 failing on its
 path- but this is a ray of light and light flies straight. Those who
 make vision depend upon resistance are obliged to postulate an
 intervening substance.
 
 The champions of the image, with its transit through a void, are
 seeking the way of least resistance; but since the entire absence of
 intervenient gives a still easier path they will not oppose that
 hypothesis.
 
 So, too, those that explain vision by sympathy must 
 recognize that
 an intervening substance will be a hindrance as tending to check or
 block or enfeeble that sympathy; this theory, especially, 
 requires the
 admission that any intervenient, and particularly one of kindred
 nature, must blunt the perception by itself absorbing part of the
 activity. Apply fire to a body continuous through and through, and
 no doubt the core will be less affected than the surface: 
 but where we
 are dealing with the sympathetic parts of one living being, 
 there will
 scarcely be less sensation because of the intervening substance, or,
 if there should be, the degree of sensation will still be
 proportionate to the nature of the separate part, with the
 intervenient acting merely as a certain limitation; this, 
 though, will
 not be the case where the element introduced is of a kind to
 overleap the bridge.
 
 But this is saying that the sympathetic quality of the universe
 depends upon its being one living thing, and that our amenability to
 experience depends upon our belonging integrally to that unity;
 would it not follow that continuity is a condition of any perception
 of a remote object?
 
 The explanation is that continuity and its concomitant, the
 bridging substance, come into play because a living being must be a
 continuous thing, but that, none the less, the receiving of 
 impression
 is not an essentially necessary result of continuity; if it were,
 everything would receive such impression from everything else, and
 if thing is affected by thing in various separate orders, 
 there can be
 no further question of any universal need of intervening substance.
 
 Why it should be especially requisite in the act of seeing would
 have to be explained: in general, an object passing through the air
 does not affect it beyond dividing it; when a stone falls, the air
 simply yields; nor is it reasonable to explain the natural direction
 of movement by resistance; to do so would bring us to the absurdity
 that resistance accounts for the upward movement of fire, 
 which on the
 contrary, overcomes the resistance of the air by its own essentially
 quick energy. If we are told that the resistance is brought more
 swiftly into play by the very swiftness of the ascending body, that
 would be a mere accidental circumstance, not a cause of the upward
 motion: in trees the upthrust from the root depends on no such
 external propulsion; we, too, in our movements cleave the air and
 are in no wise forwarded by its resistance; it simply flows in from
 behind to fill the void we make.
 
 If the severance of the air by such bodies leaves it unaffected,
 why must there be any severance before the images of sight can reach
 us?
 
 And, further, once we reject the theory that these 
 images reach us
 by way of some outstreaming from the objects seen, there is no
 reason to think of the air being affected and passing on to us, in a
 progression of impression, what has been impressed upon itself.
 
 If our perception is to depend upon previous impressions 
 made upon
 the air, then we have no direct knowledge of the object of 
 vision, but
 know it only as through an intermediary, in the same way as we are
 aware of warmth where it is not the distant fire itself that 
 warms us,
 but the warmed intervening air. That is a matter of contact; 
 but sight
 is not produced by contact: the application of an object to the eye
 would not produce sight; what is required is the illumination of the
 intervening medium; for the air in itself is a dark substance: If it
 were not for this dark substance there would probably be no 
 reason for
 the existence of light: the dark intervening matter is a barrier,
 and vision requires that it be overcome by light. Perhaps also the
 reason why an object brought close to the eye cannot be seen is that
 it confronts us with a double obscuration, its own and that of the
 air.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. For the most convincing proof that vision does not depend
 upon the transmission of impressions of any kind made upon 
 the air, we
 have only to consider that in the darkness of night we can see a
 fire and the stars and their very shapes.
 
 No one will pretend that these forms are reproduced upon the
 darkness and come to us in linked progression; if the fire thus
 rayed out its own form, there would be an end to the darkness. In
 the blackest night, when the very stars are hidden and show no gleam
 of their light, we can see the fire of the beacon-stations and of
 maritime signal-towers.
 
 Now if, in defiance of all that the senses tell us, we are to
 believe that in these examples the fire [as light] traverses the
 air, then, in so far as anything is visible, it must be that dimmed
 reproduction in the air, not the fire itself. But if an object can
 be seen on the other side of some intervening darkness, much more
 would it be visible with nothing intervening.
 
 We may hold one thing certain: the impossibility of 
 vision without
 an intervening substance does not depend upon that absence in
 itself: the sole reason is that, with the absence, there would be an
 end to the sympathy reigning in the living whole and relating the
 parts to each other in an existent unity.
 
 Perception of every kind seems to depend on the fact that our
 universe is a whole sympathetic to itself: that it is so, 
 appears from
 the universal participation in power from member to member, and
 especially in remote power.
 
 No doubt it would be worth enquiry- though we pass it for the
 present- what would take place if there were another kosmos, another
 living whole having no contact with this one, and the far ridges of
 our heavens had sight: would our sphere see that other as from a
 mutually present distance, or could there be no dealing at all from
 this to that?
 
 To return; there is a further consideration showing that sight
 is not brought about by this alleged modification of the 
 intervenient.
 
 Any modification of the air substance would necessarily be
 corporeal: there must be such an impression as is made upon sealing
 wax. But this would require that each part of the object of vision
 be impressed on some corresponding portion of the intervenient: the
 intervenient, however, in actual contact with the eye would be just
 that portion whose dimensions the pupil is capable of receiving. But
 as a matter of fact the entire object appears before the 
 pupil; and it
 is seen entire by all within that air space for a great extent, in
 front, sideways, close at hand, from the back, as long as the line
 of vision is not blocked. This shows that any given portion 
 of the air
 contains the object of vision, in face view so to speak, 
 and, at once,
 we are confronted by no merely corporeal phenomena; the facts are
 explicable only as depending upon the greater laws, the spiritual,
 of a living being one and self-sensitive.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. But there is the question of the linked light that must
 relate the visual organ to its object.
 
 Now, firstly: since the intervening air is not necessary- unless
 in the purely accidental sense that air may be necessary to 
 light- the
 light that acts as intermediate in vision will be unmodified: vision
 depends upon no modification whatever. This one intermediate, light,
 would seem to be necessary, but, unless light is corporeal, no
 intervening body is requisite: and we must remember that
 intervenient and borrowed light is essential not to seeing in
 general but to distant vision; the question whether light absolutely
 requires the presence of air we will discuss later. For the present
 one matter must occupy us:
 
 If, in the act of vision, that linked light becomes ensouled, if
 the soul or mind permeates it and enters into union with it, as it
 does in its more inward acts such as understanding- which is what
 vision really is- then the intervening light is not a necessity: the
 process of seeing will be like that of touch; the visual faculty of
 the soul will perceive by the fact of having entered into the light;
 all that intervenes remains unaffected, serving simply as the field
 over which the vision ranges.
 
 This brings up the question whether the sight is made active
 over its field by the sheer presence of a distance spread before it,
 or by the presence of a body of some kind within that distance.
 
 If by the presence of such a body, then there will be vision
 though there be no intervenient; if the intervenient is the sole
 attractive agent, then we are forced to think of the visible 
 object as
 being a Kind utterly without energy, performing no act. But so
 inactive a body cannot be: touch tells us that, for it does 
 not merely
 announce that something is by and is touched: it is acted upon by
 the object so that it reports distinguishing qualities in it,
 qualities so effective that even at a distance touch itself would
 register them but for the accidental that it demands proximity.
 
 We catch the heat of a fire just as soon as the intervening air
 does; no need to wait for it to be warmed: the denser body, in fact,
 takes in more warmth than the air has to give; in other 
 words, the air
 transmits the heat but is not the source of our warmth.
 
 When on the one side, that of the object, there is the power in
 any degree of an outgoing act, and on the other, that of the sight,
 the capability of being acted upon, surely the object needs no
 medium through which to be effective upon what it is fully 
 equipped to
 affect: this would be needing not a help but a hindrance.
 
 Or, again, consider the Dawn: there is no need that the light
 first flood the air and then come to us; the event is simultaneous
 to both: often, in fact, we see [in the distance] when the light is
 not as yet round our eyes at all but very far off, before, that is,
 the air has been acted upon: here we have vision without any
 modified intervenient, vision before the organ has received the
 light with which it is to be linked.
 
 It is difficult to reconcile with this theory the fact of seeing
 stars or any fire by night.
 
 If [as by the theory of an intervenient] the percipient mind or
 soul remains within itself and needs the light only as one might
 need a stick in the hand to touch something at a distance, then the
 perception will be a sort of tussle: the light must be conceived as
 something thrusting, something aimed at a mark, and similarly, the
 object, considered as an illuminated thing, must be conceived to be
 resistant; for this is the normal process in the case of contact by
 the agency of an intervenient.
 
 Besides, even on this explanation, the mind must have previously
 been in contact with the object in the entire absence of 
 intervenient;
 only if that has happened could contact through an intervenient
 bring knowledge, a knowledge by way of memory, and, even more
 emphatically, by way of reasoned comparison [ending in
 identification]: but this process of memory and comparison 
 is excluded
 by the theory of first knowledge through the agency of a medium.
 
 Finally, we may be told that the impinging light is modified by
 the thing to be seen and so becomes able to present something
 perceptible before the visual organ; but this simply brings 
 us back to
 the theory of an intervenient changed midway by the object, an
 explanation whose difficulties we have already indicated.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. But some doubt arises when we consider the phenomena of
 hearing.
 
 Perhaps we are to understand the process thus: the air 
 is modified
 by the first movement; layer by layer it is successively 
 acted upon by
 the object causing the sound: it finally impinges in that modified
 form upon the sense, the entire progression being governed 
 by the fact
 that all the air from starting point to hearing point is similarly
 affected.
 
 Perhaps, on the other hand, the intervenient is modified only by
 the accident of its midway position, so that, failing any
 intervenient, whatsoever sound two bodies in clash might make would
 impinge without medium upon our sense?
 
 Still air is necessary; there could be no sound in the absence
 of the air set vibrating in the first movement, however different be
 the case with the intervenient from that onwards to the perception
 point.
 
 The air would thus appear to be the dominant in the production
 of sound: two bodies would clash without even an incipient sound,
 but that the air, struck in their rapid meeting and hurled outward,
 passes on the movement successively till it reaches the ears and the
 sense of hearing.
 
 But if the determinant is the air, and the impression is 
 simply of
 air-movements, what accounts for the differences among voices and
 other sounds? The sound of bronze against bronze is different from
 that of bronze against some other substance: and so on; the air and
 its vibration remain the one thing, yet the difference in sounds is
 much more than a matter of greater or less intensity.
 
 If we decide that sound is caused by a percussion upon the air,
 then obviously nothing turning upon the distinctive nature of air is
 in question: it sounds at a moment in which it is simply a 
 solid body,
 until [by its distinctive character] it is sent pulsing 
 outwards: thus
 air in itself is not essential to the production of sound; 
 all is done
 by clashing solids as they meet and that percussion, reaching the
 sense, is the sound. This is shown also by the sounds formed within
 living beings not in air but by the friction of parts; for example,
 the grinding of teeth and the crunching of bones against 
 each other in
 the bending of the body, cases in which the air does not intervene.
 
 But all this may now be left over; we are brought to the same
 conclusion as in the case of sight; the phenomena of hearing arise
 similarly in a certain co-sensitiveness inherent in a living whole.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. We return, then, to the question whether there could be light
 if there were no air, the sun illuminating corporeal surfaces across
 an intermediate void which, as things are, takes the light
 accidentally by the mere fact of being in the path. Supposing air to
 be the cause of the rest of things being thus affected, the
 substantial existence of light is due to the air; light becomes a
 modification of the air, and of course if the thing to be 
 modified did
 not exist neither could be modification.
 
 The fact is that primarily light is no appanage of air, and does
 not depend upon the existence of air: it belongs to every fiery and
 shining body, it constitutes even the gleaming surface of certain
 stones.
 
 Now if, thus, it enters into other substances from something
 gleaming, could it exist in the absence of its container?
 
 There is a distinction to be made: if it is a quality, some
 quality of some substance, then light, equally with other qualities,
 will need a body in which to lodge: if, on the contrary, it is an
 activity rising from something else, we can surely conceive it
 existing, though there be no neighbouring body but, if that is
 possible, a blank void which it will overleap and so appear on the
 further side: it is powerful, and may very well pass over 
 unhelped. If
 it were of a nature to fall, nothing would keep it up, certainly not
 the air or anything that takes its light; there is no reason why
 they should draw the light from its source and speed it onwards.
 
 Light is not an accidental to something else, requiring
 therefore to be lodged in a base; nor is it a modification,
 demanding a base in which the modification occurs: if this 
 were so, it
 would vanish when the object or substance disappeared; but it does
 not; it strikes onward; so, too [requiring neither air nor object]
 it would always have its movement.
 
 But movement, where?
 
 Is space, pure and simple, all that is necessary?
 
 With unchecked motion of the light outward, the material sun
 will be losing its energy, for the light is its expression.
 
 Perhaps; and [from this untenable consequence] we may gather
 that the light never was an appanage of anything, but is the
 expressive Act proceeding from a base [the sun] but not seeking to
 enter into a base, though having some operation upon any 
 base that may
 be present.
 
 Life is also an Act, the Act of the soul, and it remains so when
 anything- the human body, for instance- comes in its path to be
 affected by it; and it is equally an Act though there be nothing for
 it to modify: surely this may be true of light, one of the Acts of
 whatever luminary source there be [i.e., light, affecting things,
 may be quite independent of them and require no medium, air 
 or other].
 Certainly light is not brought into being by the dark thing, air,
 which on the contrary tends to gloom it over with some touch of
 earth so that it is no longer the brilliant reality: as reasonable
 to talk of some substance being sweet because it is mixed with
 something bitter.
 
 If we are told that light is a mode of the air, we answer that
 this would necessarily imply that the air itself is changed 
 to produce
 the new mode; in other words, its characteristic darkness must
 change into non-darkness; but we know that the air maintains its
 character, in no wise affected: the modification of a thing is an
 experience within that thing itself: light therefore is not a
 modification of the air, but a self-existent in whose path the air
 happens to be present.
 
 On this point we need dwell no longer; but there remains still a
 question.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Our investigation may be furthered by enquiring: Whether
 light finally perishes or simply returns to its source.
 
 If it be a thing requiring to be caught and kept, 
 domiciled within
 a recipient, we might think of it finally passing out of 
 existence: if
 it be an Act not flowing out and away- but in circuit, with 
 more of it
 within than is in outward progress from the luminary of which it is
 the Act- then it will not cease to exist as long as that centre is
 in being. And as the luminary moves, the light will reach new
 points- not in virtue of any change of course in or out or 
 around, but
 simply because the act of the luminary exists and where there is no
 impediment is effective. Even if the distance of the sun from us
 were far greater than it is, the light would be continuous all that
 further way, as long as nothing checked or blocked it in the 
 interval.
 
 We distinguish two forms of activity; one is gathered within the
 luminary and is comparable to the life of the shining body; this is
 the vaster and is, as it were, the foundation or wellspring 
 of all the
 act; the other lies next to the surface, the outer image of the
 inner content, a secondary activity though inseparable from the
 former. For every existent has an Act which is in its likeness: as
 long as the one exists, so does the other; yet while the original is
 stationary the activity reaches forth, in some things over a wide
 range, in others less far. There are weak and faint activities, and
 there are some, even, that do not appear; but there are also things
 whose activities are great and far-going; in the case of these the
 activity must be thought of as being lodged, both in the active and
 powerful source and in the point at which it settles. This may be
 observed in the case of an animal's eyes where the pupils gleam:
 they have a light which shows outside the orbs. Again there 
 are living
 things which have an inner fire that in darkness shines out when
 they expand themselves and ceases to ray outward when they contract:
 the fire has not perished; it is a mere matter of it being rayed out
 or not.
 
 But has the light gone inward?
 
 No: it is simply no longer on the outside because the fire [of
 which it is the activity] is no longer outward going but has 
 withdrawn
 towards the centre.
 
 But surely the light has gone inward too?
 
 No: only the fire, and when that goes inward the surface
 consists only of the non-luminous body; the fire can no longer act
 towards the outer.
 
 The light, then, raying from bodies is an outgoing activity of a
 luminous body; the light within luminous bodies- understand; such as
 are primarily luminous- is the essential being embraced 
 under the idea
 of that body. When such a body is brought into association with
 Matter, its activity produces colour: when there is no such
 association, it does not give colour- it gives merely an incipient
 on which colour might be formed- for it belongs to another being
 [primal light] with which it retains its link, unable to desert from
 it, or from its [inner] activity.
 
 And light is incorporeal even when it is the light of a body;
 there is therefore no question, strictly speaking, of its withdrawal
 or of its being present- these terms do not apply to its modes- and
 its essential existence is to be an activity. As an example: 
 the image
 upon a mirror may be described as an activity exercised by the
 reflected object upon the potential recipient: there is no outgoing
 from the object [or ingoing into the reflecting body]; it is simply
 that, as long as the object stands there, the image also is visible,
 in the form of colour shaped to a certain pattern, and when 
 the object
 is not there, the reflecting surface no longer holds what it 
 held when
 the conditions were favourable.
 
 So it is with the soul considered as the activity of another and
 prior soul: as long as that prior retains its place, its next, which
 is its activity, abides.
 
 But what of a soul which is not an activity but the derivative
 of an activity- as we maintained the life-principle domiciled in the
 body to be- is its presence similar to that of the light caught and
 held in material things?
 
 No; for in those things the colour is due to an actual
 intermixture of the active element [the light being alloyed with
 Matter]; whereas the life-principle of the body is something that
 holds from another soul closely present to it.
 
 But when the body perishes- by the fact that nothing without
 part in soul can continue in being- when the body is perishing, no
 longer supported by that primal life-giving soul, or by the presence
 of any secondary phase of it, it is clear that the life-principle
 can no longer remain; but does this mean that the life perishes?
 
 No; not even it; for it, too, is an image of that first
 out-shining; it is merely no longer where it was.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. Imagine that beyond the heavenly system there existed some
 solid mass, and that from this sphere there was directed to it a
 vision utterly unimpeded and unrestricted: it is a question whether
 that solid form could be perceived by what has no 
 sympathetic relation
 with it, since we have held that sympathetic relation comes about in
 virtue of the nature inherent in some one living being.
 
 Obviously, if the sympathetic relationship depends upon the fact
 that percipients and things perceived are all members of one living
 being, no acts of perception could take place: that far body could
 be known only if it were a member of this living universe of ours-
 which condition being met, it certainly would be. But what 
 if, without
 being thus in membership, it were a corporeal entity, 
 exhibiting light
 and colour and the qualities by which we perceive things, and
 belonging to the same ideal category as the organ of vision?
 
 If our supposition [of perception by sympathy] is true, there
 would still be no perception- though we may be told that the
 hypothesis is clearly untenable since there is absurdity in
 supposing that sight can fail in grasping an illuminated object
 lying before it, and that the other senses in the presence of their
 particular objects remain unresponsive.
 
 [The following passage, to nearly the end, is offered
 tentatively as a possible help to the interpretation of an 
 obscure and
 corrupt place.]
 
 [But why does such a failing appear impossible to us? We answer,
 because here and now in all the act and experience of our senses, we
 are within a unity, and members of it. What the conditions would be
 otherwise, remains to be considered: if living sympathy suffices the
 theory is established; if not, there are other considerations to
 support it.
 
 That every living being is self-sensitive allows of no doubt; if
 the universe is a living being, no more need be said; and 
 what is true
 of the total must be true of the members, as inbound in that 
 one life.
 
 But what if we are invited to accept the theory of knowledge by
 likeness (rejecting knowledge by the self-sensitiveness of a living
 unity)?
 
 Awareness must be determined by the nature and character of the
 living being in which it occurs; perception, then, means that the
 likeness demanded by the hypothesis is within this self-identical
 living being (and not in the object)- for the organ by which the
 perception takes place is in the likeness of the living being (is
 merely the agent adequately expressing the nature of the living
 being): thus perception is reduced to a mental awareness by means of
 organs akin to the object.
 
 If, then, something that is a living whole perceives not its own
 content but things like to its content, it must perceive them under
 the conditions of that living whole; this means that, in so far as
 it has perception, the objects appear not as its content but as
 related to its content.
 
 And the objects are thus perceived as related because the mind
 itself has related them in order to make them amenable to its
 handling: in other words the causative soul or mind in that other
 sphere is utterly alien, and the things there, supposed to be
 related to the content of this living whole, can be nothing to our
 minds.]
 
 This absurdity shows that the hypothesis contains a
 contradiction which naturally leads to untenable results. In fact,
 under one and the same heading, it presents mind and no 
 mind, it makes
 things kin and no kin, it confuses similar and dissimilar:
 containing these irreconcilable elements, it amounts to no
 hypothesis at all. At one and the same moment it postulates 
 and denies
 a soul, it tells of an All that is partial, of a something 
 which is at
 once distinct and not distinct, of a nothingness which is no
 nothingness, of a complete thing that is incomplete: the hypothesis
 therefore must be dismissed; no deduction is possible where a thesis
 cancels its own propositions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SIXTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 PERCEPTION AND MEMORY.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Perceptions are no imprints, we have said, are not to be
 thought of as seal-impressions on soul or mind: accepting this
 statement, there is one theory of memory which must be definitely
 rejected.
 
 Memory is not to be explained as the retaining of information in
 virtue of the lingering of an impression which in fact was 
 never made;
 the two things stand or fall together; either an impression is made
 upon the mind and lingers when there is remembrance, or, denying the
 impression, we cannot hold that memory is its lingering. Since we
 reject equally the impression and the retention we are 
 obliged to seek
 for another explanation of perception and memory, one excluding the
 notions that the sensible object striking upon soul or mind makes a
 mark upon it, and that the retention of this mark is memory.
 
 If we study what occurs in the case of the most vivid form of
 perception, we can transfer our results to the other cases, and so
 solve our problem.
 
 In any perception we attain by sight, the object is grasped
 there where it lies in the direct line of vision; it is there that
 we attack it; there, then, the perception is formed; the mind looks
 outward; this is ample proof that it has taken and takes no inner
 imprint, and does not see in virtue of some mark made upon it like
 that of the ring on the wax; it need not look outward at all if,
 even as it looked, it already held the image of the object, seeing by
 virtue of an impression made upon itself. It includes with the
 object the interval, for it tells at what distance the vision takes
 place: how could it see as outlying an impression within itself,
 separated by no interval from itself? Then, the point of magnitude:
 how could the mind, on this hypothesis, define the external size of
 the object or perceive that it has any- the magnitude of the sky,
 for instance, whose stamped imprint would be too vast for it to
 contain? And, most convincing of all, if to see is to accept
 imprints of the objects of our vision, we can never see these
 objects themselves; we see only vestiges they leave within us,
 shadows: the things themselves would be very different from 
 our vision
 of them. And, for a conclusive consideration, we cannot see if the
 living object is in contact with the eye, we must look from a
 certain distance; this must be more applicable to the mind;
 supposing the mind to be stamped with an imprint of the object, it
 could not grasp as an object of vision what is stamped upon itself.
 For vision demands a duality, of seen and seeing: the seeing agent
 must be distinct and act upon an impression outside it, not upon one
 occupying the same point with it: sight can deal only with an object
 not inset but outlying.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. But if perception does not go by impression, what is the
 process?
 
 The mind affirms something not contained within it: this is
 precisely the characteristic of a power- not to accept 
 impression but,
 within its allotted sphere, to act.
 
 Besides, the very condition of the mind being able to exercise
 discrimination upon what it is to see and hear is not, of 
 course, that
 these objects be equally impressions made upon it; on the contrary,
 there must be no impressions, nothing to which the mind is passive;
 there can be only acts of that in which the objects become known.
 
 Our tendency is to think of any of the faculties as 
 unable to know
 its appropriate object by its own uncompelled act; to us it seems to
 submit to its environment rather than simply to perceive it, 
 though in
 reality it is the master, not the victim.
 
 As with sight, so with hearing. It is the air which takes the
 impression, a kind of articulated stroke which may be compared to
 letters traced upon it by the object causing the sound; but 
 it belongs
 to the faculty, and the soul-essence, to read the imprints thus
 appearing before it, as they reach the point at which they become
 matter of its knowledge.
 
 In taste and smell also we distinguish between the impressions
 received and the sensations and judgements; these last are mental
 acts, and belong to an order apart from the experiences upon which
 they are exercised.
 
 The knowing of the things belonging to the Intellectual is not
 in any such degree attended by impact or impression: they come
 forward, on the contrary, as from within, unlike the sense-objects
 known as from without: they have more emphatically the character of
 acts; they are acts in the stricter sense, for their origin is in
 the soul, and every concept of this Intellectual order is the soul
 about its Act.
 
 Whether, in this self-vision, the soul is a duality and views
 itself as from the outside- while seeing the 
 Intellectual-Principal as
 a unity, and itself with the Intellectual-Principle as a unity- this
 question is investigated elsewhere.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. With this prologue we come to our discussion of Memory.
 
 That the soul, or mind, having taken no imprint, yet achieves
 perception of what it in no way contains need not surprise us; or
 rather, surprising though it is, we cannot refuse to believe in this
 remarkable power.
 
 The Soul is the Reason-Principle of the universe, ultimate among
 the Intellectual Beings- its own essential Nature is one of 
 the Beings
 of the Intellectual Realm- but it is the primal Reason-Principle of
 the entire realm of sense.
 
 Thus it has dealings with both orders- benefited and quickened
 by the one, but by the other beguiled, falling before resemblances,
 and so led downwards as under spell. Poised midway, it is aware of
 both spheres.
 
 Of the Intellectual it is said to have intuition by memory upon
 approach, for it knows them by a certain natural identity with them;
 its knowledge is not attained by besetting them, so to speak, but by
 in a definite degree possessing them; they are its natural vision;
 they are itself in a more radiant mode, and it rises from its duller
 pitch to that greater brilliance in a sort of awakening, a progress
 from its latency to its act.
 
 To the sense-order it stands in a similar nearness and to such
 things it gives a radiance out of its own store and, as it were,
 elaborates them to visibility: the power is always ripe and, so to
 say, in travail towards them, so that, whenever it puts out its
 strength in the direction of what has once been present in 
 it, it sees
 that object as present still; and the more intent its effort the
 more durable is the presence. This is why, it is agreed, 
 children have
 long memory; the things presented to them are not constantly 
 withdrawn
 but remain in sight; in their case the attention is limited but not
 scattered: those whose faculty and mental activity are busied upon a
 multitude of subjects pass quickly over all, lingering on none.
 
 Now, if memory were a matter of seal-impressions retained, the
 multiplicity of objects would have no weakening effect on the
 memory. Further, on the same hypothesis, we would have no need of
 thinking back to revive remembrance; nor would we be subject to
 forgetting and recalling; all would lie engraved within.
 
 The very fact that we train ourselves to remember shows that
 what we get by the process is a strengthening of the mind: just so,
 exercises for feet and hands enable us to do easily acts which in no
 sense contained or laid up in those members, but to which they may
 be fitted by persevering effort.
 
 How else can it be explained that we forget a thing heard once
 or twice but remember what is often repeated, and that we recall a
 long time afterwards what at first hearing we failed to hold?
 
 It is no answer to say that the parts present themselves sooner
 than the entire imprint- why should they too be forgotten?- [there
 is no question of parts, for] the last hearing, or our effort to
 remember, brings the thing back to us in a flash.
 
 All these considerations testify to an evocation of that faculty
 of the soul, or mind, in which remembrance is vested: the mind is
 strengthened, either generally or to this particular purpose.
 
 Observe these facts: memory follows upon attention; 
 those who have
 memorized much, by dint of their training in the use of leading
 indications [suggestive words and the like], reach the point of
 being easily able to retain without such aid: must we not conclude
 that the basis of memory is the soul-power brought to full strength?
 
 The lingering imprints of the other explanation would tell of
 weakness rather than power; for to take imprint easily is to be
 yielding. An impression is something received passively; the 
 strongest
 memory, then, would go with the least active nature. But what
 happens is the very reverse: in no pursuit to technical 
 exercises tend
 to make a man less the master of his acts and states. It is as with
 sense-perception; the advantage is not to the weak, the weak eye for
 example, but to that which has the fullest power towards its 
 exercise.
 In the old, it is significant, the senses are dulled and so is the
 memory.
 
 Sensation and memory, then, are not passivity but power.
 
 And, once it is admitted that sensations are not impressions,
 the memory of a sensation cannot consist in the retention of an
 impression that was never made.
 
 Yes: but if it is an active power of the mind, a fitness towards
 its particular purpose, why does it not come at once- and not with
 delay- to the recollection of its unchanging objects?
 
 Simply because the power needs to be poised and prepared: in
 this it is only like all the others, which have to be readied for
 the task to which their power reaches, some operating very swiftly,
 others only after a certain self-concentration.
 
 Quick memory does not in general go with quick wit: the 
 two do not
 fall under the same mental faculty; runner and boxer are not often
 united in one person; the dominant idea differs from man to man.
 
 Yet there could be nothing to prevent men of superior 
 faculty from
 reading impressions on the mind; why should one thus gifted be
 incapable of what would be no more than a passive taking and holding?
 
 That memory is a power of the Soul [not a capacity for taking
 imprint] is established at a stroke by the consideration 
 that the soul
 is without magnitude.
 
 And- one general reflection- it is not extraordinary that
 everything concerning soul should proceed in quite other ways than
 appears to people who either have never enquired, or have hastily
 adopted delusive analogies from the phenomena of sense, and 
 persist in
 thinking of perception and remembrance in terms of characters
 inscribed on plates or tablets; the impossibilities that beset this
 theory escape those that make the soul incorporeal equally with
 those to whom it is corporeal.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SEVENTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Whether every human being is immortal or we are wholly
 destroyed, or whether something of us passes over to dissolution and
 destruction, while something else, that which is the true 
 man, endures
 for ever- this question will be answered here for those willing to
 investigate our nature.
 
 We know that man is not a thing of one only element; he 
 has a soul
 and he has, whether instrument or adjunct in some other mode, a
 body: this is the first distinction; it remains to investigate the
 nature and essential being of these two constituents.
 
 Reason tells us that the body as, itself too, a composite,
 cannot for ever hold together; and our senses show us it breaking
 up, wearing out, the victim of destructive agents of many kinds,
 each of its constituents going its own way, one part working against
 another, perverting, wrecking, and this especially when the material
 masses are no longer presided over by the reconciling soul.
 
 And when each single constituent is taken as a thing apart, it
 is still not a unity; for it is divisible into shape and matter, the
 duality without which bodies at their very simplest cannot cohere.
 
 The mere fact that, as material forms, they have bulk means that
 they can be lopped and crushed and so come to destruction.
 
 If this body, then, is really a part of us, we are not wholly
 immortal; if it is an instrument of ours, then, as a thing put at
 our service for a certain time, it must be in its nature passing.
 
 The sovereign principle, the authentic man, will be as Form to
 this Matter or as agent to this instrument, and thus, whatever that
 relation be, the soul is the man.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. But of what nature is this sovereign principle?
 
 If material, then definitely it must fall apart; for every
 material entity, at least, is something put together.
 
 If it is not material but belongs to some other Kind, that new
 substance must be investigated in the same way or by some more
 suitable method.
 
 But our first need is to discover into what this material form,
 since such the soul is to be, can dissolve.
 
 Now: of necessity life is inherent to soul: this material
 entity, then, which we call soul must have life ingrained within it;
 but [being a composite as by hypothesis, material] it must be made
 up of two or more bodies; that life, then, will be vested, either in
 each and all of those bodies or in one of them to the 
 exclusion of the
 other or others; if this be not so, then there is no life present
 anywhere.
 
 If any one of them contains this ingrained life, that one is the
 soul. But what sort of an entity have we there; what is this body
 which of its own nature possesses soul?
 
 Fire, air, water, earth, are in themselves soulless- 
 whenever soul
 is in any of them, that life is borrowed- and there are no 
 other forms
 of body than these four: even the school that believes there are has
 always held them to be bodies, not souls, and to be without life.
 
 None of these, then, having life, it would be extraordinary if
 life came about by bringing them together; it is impossible, in
 fact, that the collocation of material entities should produce life,
 or mindless entities mind.
 
 No one, moreover, would pretend that a mere chance mixing could
 give such results: some regulating principle would be necessary,
 some Cause directing the admixture: that guiding principle would be-
 soul.
 
 Body- not merely because it is a composite, but even were it
 simplex- could not exist unless there were soul in the universe, for
 body owes its being to the entrance of a Reason-Principle 
 into Matter,
 and only from soul can a Reason-Principle come.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Anyone who rejects this view, and holds that either atoms or
 some entities void of part coming together produce soul, is 
 refuted by
 the very unity of soul and by the prevailing sympathy as much as by
 the very coherence of the constituents. Bodily materials, in nature
 repugnant to unification and to sensation, could never produce unity
 or self-sensitiveness, and soul is self-sensitive. And, again,
 constituents void of part could never produce body or bulk.
 
 Perhaps we will be asked to consider body as a simple entity
 [disregarding the question of any constituent elements]: they will
 tell us, then, that no doubt, as purely material, it cannot have a
 self-springing life- since matter is without quality- but 
 that life is
 introduced by the fact that the Matter is brought to order under
 Forming-Idea. But if by this Forming-Idea they mean an essential, a
 real being, then it is not the conjoint of body and idea that
 constitutes soul: it must be one of the two items and that one,
 being [by hypothesis] outside of the Matter, cannot be body: to make
 it body would simply force us to repeat our former analysis.
 
 If on the contrary they do not mean by this Forming-Idea a real
 being, but some condition or modification of the Matter, they must
 tell us how and whence this modification, with resultant life, can
 have found the way into the Matter: for very certainly 
 Matter does not
 mould itself to pattern or bring itself to life.
 
 It becomes clear that since neither Matter nor body in any mode
 has this power, life must be brought upon the stage by some
 directing principle external and transcendent to all that is
 corporeal.
 
 In fact, body itself could not exist in any form if 
 soul-power did
 not: body passes; dissolution is in its very nature; all would
 disappear in a twinkling if all were body. It is no help to 
 erect some
 one mode of body into soul; made of the same Matter as the rest,
 this soul body would fall under the same fate: of course it could
 never really exist: the universe of things would halt at the 
 material,
 failing something to bring Matter to shape.
 
 Nay more: Matter itself could not exist: the totality of 
 things in
 this sphere is dissolved if it be made to depend upon the 
 coherence of
 a body which, though elevated to the nominal rank of "soul," remains
 air, fleeting breath [the Stoic pneuma, rarefied matter, "spirit" in
 the lower sense], whose very unity is not drawn from itself.
 
 All bodies are in ceaseless process of dissolution; how can the
 kosmos be made over to any one of them without being turned into a
 senseless haphazard drift? This pneuma- orderless except under soul-
 how can it contain order, reason, intelligence? But: given soul, all
 these material things become its collaborators towards the coherence
 of the kosmos and of every living being, all the qualities of all
 the separate objects converging to the purposes of the universe:
 failing soul in the things of the universe, they could not 
 even exist,
 much less play their ordered parts.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. Our opponents themselves are driven by stress of fact to
 admit the necessity of a prior to body, a higher thing, some phase
 or form of soul; their "pneuma" [finer-body or spirit] is 
 intelligent,
 and they speak of an "intellectual fire"; this "fire" and "spirit"
 they imagine to be necessary to the existence of the higher order
 which they conceive as demanding some base, though the real
 difficulty, under their theory, is to find a base for material
 things whose only possible base is, precisely, the powers of soul.
 
 Besides, if they make life and soul no more than this "pneuma,"
 what is the import of that repeated qualification of theirs "in a
 certain state," their refuge when they are compelled to 
 recognize some
 acting principle apart from body? If not every pneuma is a soul, but
 thousands of them soulless, and only the pneuma in this "certain
 state" is soul, what follows? Either this "certain state," this
 shaping or configuration of things, is a real being or it is nothing.
 
 If it is nothing, only the pneuma exists, the "certain state"
 being no more than a word; this leads imperatively to the assertion
 that Matter alone exists, Soul and God mere words, the lowest alone
 is.
 
 If on the contrary this "configuration" is really existent-
 something distinct from the underlie or Matter, something residing
 in Matter but itself immaterial as not constructed out of 
 Matter, then
 it must be a Reason-Principle, incorporeal, a separate Nature.
 
 There are other equally cogent proofs that the soul cannot be
 any form of body.
 
 Body is either warm or cold, hard or soft, liquid or solid,
 black or white, and so on through all the qualities by which one is
 different from another; and, again, if a body is warm it 
 diffuses only
 warmth, if cold it can only chill, if light its presence 
 tells against
 the total weight which if heavy it increases; black, it darkens;
 white, it lightens; fire has not the property of chilling or a cold
 body that of warming.
 
 Soul, on the contrary, operates diversely in different living
 beings, and has quite contrary effects in any one: its productions
 contain the solid and the soft, the dense and the sparse, bright and
 dark, heavy and light. If it were material, its quality- and the
 colour it must have- would produce one invariable effect and not the
 variety actually observed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. Again, there is movement: all bodily movement is uniform;
 failing an incorporeal soul, how account for diversity of movement?
 Predilections, reasons, they will say; that is all very well, but
 these already contain that variety and therefore cannot 
 belong to body
 which is one and simplex, and, besides, is not participant in
 reason- that is, not in the sense here meant, but only as it is
 influenced by some principle which confers upon it the qualities of,
 for instance, being warm or cold.
 
 Then there is growth under a time-law, and within a definite
 limit: how can this belong strictly to body? Body can indeed be
 brought to growth, but does not itself grow except in the sense that
 in the material mass a capacity for growing is included as an
 accessory to some principle whose action upon the body causes growth.
 
 Supposing the soul to be at once a body and the cause of growth,
 then, if it is to keep pace with the substance it augments, it too
 must grow; that means it must add to itself a similar bodily 
 material.
 For the added material must be either soul or soulless body: if
 soul, whence and how does it enter, and by what process is 
 it adjoined
 [to the soul which by hypothesis is body]; if soulless, how does
 such an addition become soul, falling into accord with its
 precedent, making one thing with it, sharing the stored impressions
 and notions of that initial soul instead, rather, of remaining an
 alien ignoring all the knowledge laid up before?
 
 Would not such a soulless addition be subject to just such loss
 and gain of substance, in fact to the non-identity, which marks the
 rest of our material mass?
 
 And, if this were so, how explain our memories or our
 recognition of familiar things when we have no stably identical soul?
 
 Assume soul to be a body: now in the nature of body,
 characteristically divisible, no one of the parts can be identical
 with the entire being; soul, then, is a thing of defined size, and
 if curtailed must cease to be what it is; in the nature of a
 quantitative entity this must be so, for, if a thing of magnitude on
 diminution retains its identity in virtue of its quality, 
 this is only
 saying that bodily and quantitatively it is different even if its
 identity consists in a quality quite independent of quantity.
 
 What answer can be made by those declaring soul to be corporeal?
 Is every part of the soul, in any one body, soul entire, soul
 perfectly true to its essential being? and may the same be said of
 every part of the part? If so, the magnitude makes no contribution
 to the soul's essential nature, as it must if soul [as 
 corporeal] were
 a definite magnitude: it is, as body cannot be, an 
 "all-everywhere," a
 complete identity present at each and every point, the part all that
 the whole is.
 
 To deny that every part is soul is to make soul a compound from
 soulless elements. Further, if a definite magnitude, the double
 limit of larger or smaller, is to be imposed upon each separate
 soul, then anything outside those limits is no soul.
 
 Now, a single coition and a single sperm suffice to a twin
 birth or in the animal order to a litter; there is a splitting and
 diverging of the seed, every diverging part being obviously a whole:
 surely no honest mind can fail to gather that a thing in 
 which part is
 identical with whole has a nature which transcends quantity, and
 must of necessity be without quantity: only so could it remain
 identical when quantity is filched from it, only by being
 indifferent to amount or extension, by being in essence something
 apart. Thus the Soul and the Reason-Principles are without quantity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. It is easy to show that if the Soul were a corporeal entity,
 there could be no sense-perception, no mental act, no knowledge, no
 moral excellence, nothing of all that is noble.
 
 There can be no perception without a unitary percipient whose
 identity enables it to grasp an object as an entirety.
 
 The several senses will each be the entrance point of 
 many diverse
 perceptions; in any one object there may be many characteristics;
 any one organ may be the channel of a group of objects, as for
 instance a face is known not by a special sense for separate 
 features,
 nose, eyes; etc., but by one sense observing all in one act.
 
 When sight and hearing gather their varying information, there
 must be some central unity to which both report. How could there be
 any statement of difference unless all sense-impressions appeared
 before a common identity able to take the sum of all?
 
 This there must be, as there is a centre to a circle; the
 sense-impressions converging from every point of occurrence 
 will be as
 lines striking from a circumference to what will be a true centre of
 perception as being a veritable unity.
 
 If this centre were to break into separate points- so that the
 sense-impressions fell upon the two ends of a line- then, either it
 must reknit itself to unity and identity, perhaps at the mid-point
 of the line, or all remains unrelated, every end receiving the
 report of its particular field exactly as you and I have our
 distinct sense experiences.
 
 Suppose the sense-object be such a unity as a face: all 
 the points
 of observation must be brought together in one visual total, as is
 obvious since there could be no panorama of great expanses unless
 the detail were compressed to the capacity of the pupils.
 
 Much more must this be true in the case of thoughts, partless
 entities as they are, impinging upon the centre of 
 consciousness which
 [to receive them] must itself be void of part.
 
 Either this or, supposing the centre of consciousness to be a
 thing of quantity and extension, the sensible object will coincide
 with it point by point of their co-expansion so that any given point
 in the faculty will perceive solely what coincides with it in the
 object: and thus nothing in us could perceive any thing as a whole.
 
 This cannot be: the faculty entire must be a unity; no such
 dividing is possible; this is no matter in which we can 
 think of equal
 sections coinciding; the centre of consciousness has no such
 relation of equality with any sensible object. The only 
 possible ratio
 of divisibility would be that of the number of diverse 
 elements in the
 impinging sensation: are we then to suppose that each part of the
 soul, and every part of each part, will have perception? Or will the
 part of the parts have none? That is impossible: every part, 
 then, has
 perception; the [hypothetical] magnitude, of soul and each part of
 soul, is infinitely divisible; there will therefore be in 
 each part an
 infinite number of perceptions of the object, and therefore an
 infinitude of representations of it at our centre of consciousness.
 
 If the sentient be a material entity sensation could only be of
 the order of seal-impressions struck by a ring on wax, in 
 this case by
 sensible objects on the blood or on the intervenient air.
 
 If, at this, the impression is like one made in liquids- as
 would be reasonable- it will be confused and wavering as upon water,
 and there can be no memory. If the impressions are permanent, then
 either no fresh ones can be stamped upon the occupied ground- and
 there can be no change of sensations- or, others being made, the
 former will be obliterated; and all record of the past is done away
 with.
 
 If memory implies fresh sensations imposed upon former ones, the
 earlier not barring their way, the soul cannot be a material entity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. We come to the same result by examining the sense of pain. We
 say there is pain in the finger: the trouble is doubtless in the
 finger, but our opponents must admit that the sensation of 
 the pain is
 in the centre of consciousness. The suffering member is one 
 thing, the
 sense of suffering is another: how does this happen?
 
 By transmission, they will say: the psychic pneuma [= the
 semi-material principle of life] stationed at the finger suffers
 first; and stage by stage the trouble is passed on until at last it
 reaches the centre of consciousness.
 
 But on this theory, there must be a sensation in the spot first
 suffering pain, and another sensation at a second point of 
 the line of
 transmission, another in the third and so on; many 
 sensations, in fact
 an unlimited series, to deal with one pain; and at the last 
 moment the
 centre of consciousness has the sensation of all these sensations
 and of its own sensation to boot. Or to be exact, these serial
 sensations will not be of the pain in the finger: the sensation next
 in succession to the suffering finger will be of pain at the joint,
 a third will tell of a pain still higher up: there will be a 
 series of
 separate pains: The centre of consciousness will not feel the pain
 seated at the finger, but only that impinging upon itself: it will
 know this alone, ignore the rest and so have no notion that 
 the finger
 is in pain.
 
 Thus: Transmission would not give sensation of the actual
 condition at the affected spot: it is not in the nature of body that
 where one part suffers there should be knowledge in another part;
 for body is a magnitude, and the parts of every magnitude 
 are distinct
 parts; therefore we need, as the sentient, something of a 
 nature to be
 identical to itself at any and every spot; this property can belong
 only to some other form of being than body.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. It can be shown also that the intellectual act would
 similarly be impossible if the soul were any form of body.
 
 If sensation is apprehension by means of the soul's employment
 of the body, intellection cannot be a similar use of the body or it
 would be identical with sensation. If then intellection is
 apprehension apart from body, much more must there be a distinction
 between the body and the intellective principle: sensation 
 for objects
 of sense, intellection for the intellectual object. And even if this
 be rejected, it must still be admitted that there do exist
 intellections of intellectual objects and perceptions of objects not
 possessing magnitude: how, we may then ask, can a thing of magnitude
 know a thing that has no magnitude, or how can the partless be known
 by means of what has parts? We will be told "By some partless part."
 But, at this, the intellective will not be body: for contact does
 not need a whole; one point suffices. If then it be conceded- and it
 cannot be denied- that the primal intellections deal with objects
 completely incorporeal, the principle of intellection itself 
 must know
 by virtue of being, or becoming, free from body. Even if they hold
 that all intellection deals with the ideal forms in Matter, still it
 always takes place by abstraction from the bodies [in which these
 forms appear] and the separating agent is the
 Intellectual-Principle. For assuredly the process by which 
 we abstract
 circle, triangle, line or point, is not carried through by the aid
 of flesh or Matter of any kind; in all such acts the soul or 
 mind must
 separate itself from the material: at once we see that it cannot be
 itself material. Similarly it will be agreed that, as beauty and
 justice are things without magnitude, so must be the intellective
 act that grasps them.
 
 When such non-magnitudes come before the soul, it 
 receives them by
 means of its partless phase and they will take position there in
 partless wise.
 
 Again: if the Soul is a body, how can we account for its
 virtues- moral excellence [Sophrosyne], justice, courage and 
 so forth?
 All these could be only some kind of rarefied body [pneuma], or
 blood in some form; or we might see courage as a certain resisting
 power in that pneuma; moral quality would be its happy blending;
 beauty would lie wholly in the agreeable form of impressions 
 received,
 such comeliness as leads us to describe people as attractive and
 beautiful from their bodily appearance. No doubt strength 
 and grace of
 form go well enough with the idea of rarefied body; but what can
 this rarefied body want with moral excellence? On the contrary its
 interest would lie in being comfortable in its environments and
 contacts, in being warmed or pleasantly cool, in bringing everything
 smooth and caressing and soft around it: what could it care about a
 just distribution?
 
 Then consider the objects of the soul's contemplation, virtue
 and the other Intellectual forms with which it is occupied; are
 these eternal or are we to think that virtue rises here or there,
 helps, then perishes? These things must have an author and a source
 and there, again, we are confronted by something perdurable: the
 soul's contemplation, then, must be of the eternal and unchanging,
 like the concepts of geometry: if eternal and unchanging, these
 objects are not bodies: and that which is to receive them must be of
 equivalent nature: it cannot therefore be body, since all
 body-nature lacks permanence, is a thing of flux.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. A. [sometimes appearing as 9] There are those who 
 insist on the
 activities observed in bodies- warming, chilling, thrusting, 
 pressing-
 and class soul with body, as it were to assure its efficacy. This
 ignores the double fact that the very bodies themselves exercise
 such efficiency by means of the incorporeal powers operating in
 them, and that these are not the powers we attribute to soul:
 intellection, perception, reasoning, desire, wise and 
 effective action
 in all regards, these point to a very different form of being.
 
 In transferring to bodies the powers of the unembodied, this
 school leaves nothing to that higher order. And yet that it is
 precisely in virtue of bodiless powers that bodies possess their
 efficiency is clear from certain reflections:
 
 It will be admitted that quality and quantity are two different
 things, that body is always a thing of quantity but not 
 always a thing
 of quality: matter is not qualified. This admitted, it will not be
 denied that quality, being a different thing from quantity, is a
 different thing from body. Obviously quality could not be 
 body when it
 has not quantity as all body must; and, again, as we have said,
 body, any thing of mass, on being reduced to fragments, ceases to be
 what it was, but the quality it possessed remains intact in every
 particle- for instance the sweetness of honey is still sweetness in
 each speck- this shows that sweetness and all other qualities are
 not body.
 
 Further: if the powers in question were bodies, then necessarily
 the stronger powers would be large masses and those less efficient
 small masses: but if there are large masses with small while 
 not a few
 of the smaller masses manifest great powers, then the efficiency
 must be vested in something other than magnitude; efficacy, thus,
 belongs to non-magnitude. Again; Matter, they tell us, remains
 unchanged as long as it is body, but produces variety upon accepting
 qualities; is not this proof enough that the entrants [with whose
 arrival the changes happen] are Reason-Principles and not of the
 bodily order?
 
 They must not remind us that when pneuma and blood are no longer
 present, animals die: these are necessary no doubt to life, 
 but so are
 many other things of which none could possibly be soul: and neither
 pneuma nor blood is present throughout the entire being; but soul is.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. B. (10) If the soul is body and permeates the entire 
 body-mass,
 still even in this entire permeation the blending must be in accord
 with what occurs in all cases of bodily admixing.
 
 Now: if in the admixing of bodies neither constituent can retain
 its efficacy, the soul too could no longer be effective within the
 bodies; it could but be latent; it will have lost that by which it
 is soul, just as in an admixture of sweet and bitter the sweet
 disappears: we have, thus, no soul.
 
 Two bodies [i.e., by hypothesis, the soul and the human body]
 are blended, each entire through the entirety of the other; where
 the one is, the other is also; each occupies an equal extension and
 each the whole extension; no increase of size has been caused by the
 juncture: the one body thus inblended can have left in the other
 nothing undivided. This is no case of mixing in the sense of
 considerable portions alternating; that would be described as
 collocation; no; the incoming entity goes through the other to the
 very minutest point- an impossibility, of course; the less becoming
 equal to the greater; still, all is traversed throughout and divided
 throughout. Now if, thus, the inblending is to occur point by point,
 leaving no undivided material anywhere, the division of the body
 concerned must have been a division into (geometrical) points: an
 impossibility. The division is an infinite series- any material
 particle may be cut in two- and the infinities are not merely
 potential, they are actual.
 
 Therefore body cannot traverse anything as a whole traversing a
 whole. But soul does this. It is therefore incorporeal.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. C. (11) We come to the theory that this pneuma is an earlier
 form, one which on entering the cold and being tempered by 
 it develops
 into soul by growing finer under that new condition. This is 
 absurd at
 the start, since many living beings rise in warmth and have a soul
 that has been tempered by cold: still that is the theory- 
 the soul has
 an earlier form, and develops its true nature by force of external
 accidents. Thus these teachers make the inferior precede the higher,
 and before that inferior they put something still lower, their
 "Habitude." It is obvious that the Intellectual-Principle is last
 and has sprung from the soul, for, if it were first of all, the
 order of the series must be, second the soul, then the
 nature-principle, and always the later inferior, as the system
 actually stands.
 
 If they treat God as they do the Intellectual-Principle- 
 as later,
 engendered and deriving intellection from without- soul and
 intellect and God may prove to have no existence: this would 
 follow if
 a potentiality could not come to existence, or does not 
 become actual,
 unless the corresponding actuality exists. And what could lead it
 onward if there were no separate being in previous actuality? Even
 on the absurd supposition that the potentially existent brings
 itself to actuality, it must be looking to some Term, and 
 that must be
 no potentiality but actual.
 
 No doubt the eternally self-identical may have 
 potentiality and be
 self-led to self-realization, but even in this case the being
 considered as actualized is of higher order than the being
 considered as merely capable of actualization and moving towards a
 desired Term.
 
 Thus the higher is the earlier, and it has a nature other than
 body, and it exists always in actuality: Intellectual-Principle and
 Soul precede Nature: thus, Soul does not stand at the level of
 pneuma or of body.
 
 These arguments are sufficient in themselves, though many others
 have been framed, to show that the soul is not to be thought of as a
 body.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. D. (12) Soul belongs, then, to another Nature: What 
 is this? Is
 it something which, while distinct from body, still belongs 
 to it, for
 example a harmony or accord?
 
 The Pythagorean school holds this view thinking that the soul
 is, with some difference, comparable to the accord in the 
 strings of a
 lyre. When the lyre is strung a certain condition is 
 produced upon the
 strings, and this is known as accord: in the same way our body is
 formed of distinct constituents brought together, and the blend
 produces at once life and that soul which is the condition existing
 upon the bodily total.
 
 That this opinion is untenable has already been shown at length.
 The soul is a prior [to body], the accord is a secondary to the
 lyre. Soul rules, guides and often combats the body; as an accord of
 body it could not do these things. Soul is a real being, accord is
 not. That due blending [or accord] of the corporeal materials which
 constitute our frame would be simply health. Each separate 
 part of the
 body, entering as a distinct entity into the total, would require a
 distinct soul [its own accord or note], so that there would be many
 souls to each person. Weightiest of all; before this soul there
 would have to be another soul to bring about the accord as, in the
 case of the musical instrument, there is the musician who 
 produces the
 accord upon the strings by his own possession of the principle on
 which he tunes them: neither musical strings nor human bodies could
 put themselves in tune.
 
 Briefly, the soulless is treated as ensouled, the unordered
 becomes orderly by accident, and instead of order being due to soul,
 soul itself owes its substantial existence to order- which is
 self-caused. Neither in the sphere of the partial, nor in that of
 Wholes could this be true. The soul, therefore, is not a harmony or
 accord.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. E. (13) We come to the doctrine of the Entelechy, and must
 enquire how it is applied to soul.
 
 It is thought that in the Conjoint of body and soul the 
 soul holds
 the rank of Form to the Matter which here is the ensouled body- not,
 then, Form to every example of body or to body as merely such, but
 to a natural organic body having the potentiality of life.
 
 Now; if the soul has been so injected as to be assimilated into
 the body as the design of a statue is worked into the bronze, it
 will follow that, upon any dividing of the body, the soul is divided
 with it, and if any part of the body is cut away a fragment of soul
 must go with it. Since an Entelechy must be inseparable from the
 being of which it is the accomplished actuality, the 
 withdrawal of the
 soul in sleep cannot occur; in fact sleep itself cannot occur.
 Moreover if the soul is an Entelechy, there is an end to the
 resistance offered by reason to the desires; the total [of body and
 Entelechy-Soul] must have one-uniform experience throughout, and be
 aware of no internal contradiction. Sense-perception might occur;
 but intellection would be impossible. The very upholders of the
 Entelechy are thus compelled to introduce another soul, the
 Intellect, to which they ascribe immortality. The reasoning soul,
 then, must be an Entelechy- if the word is to be used at all- in some
 other mode.
 
 Even the sense-perceiving soul, in its possession of the
 impressions of absent objects, must hold these without aid from the
 body; for otherwise the impression must be present in it like shape
 and images, and that would mean that it could not take in fresh
 impressions; the perceptive soul, then, cannot be described as this
 Entelechy inseparable from the body. Similarly the desiring
 principle, dealing not only with food and drink but with things
 quite apart from body; this also is no inseparable Entelechy.
 
 There remains the vegetal principle which might seem to suggest
 the possibility that, in this phase, the soul may be the inseparable
 Entelechy of the doctrine. But it is not so. The principle of every
 growth lies at the root; in many plants the new springing takes
 place at the root or just above it: it is clear that the
 life-principle, the vegetal soul, has abandoned the upper portions
 to concentrate itself at that one spot: it was therefore not present
 in the whole as an inseparable Entelechy. Again, before the plant's
 development the life-principle is situated in that small beginning:
 if, thus, it passes from large growth to small and from the small to
 the entire growth, why should it not pass outside altogether?
 
 An Entelechy is not a thing of parts; how then could it be
 present partwise in the partible body?
 
 An identical soul is now the soul of one living being now of
 another: how could the soul of the first become the soul of 
 the latter
 if soul were the Entelechy of one particular being? Yet that this
 transference does occur is evident from the facts of animal
 metasomatosis.
 
 The substantial existence of the soul, then, does not depend
 upon serving as Form to anything: it is an Essence which 
 does not come
 into being by finding a seat in body; it exists before it 
 becomes also
 the soul of some particular, for example, of a living being, whose
 body would by this doctrine be the author of its soul.
 
 What, then, is the soul's Being? If it is neither body 
 nor a state
 or experience of body, but is act and creation: if it holds much and
 gives much, and is an existence outside of body; of what order and
 character must it be? Clearly it is what we describe as Veritable
 Essence. The other order, the entire corporeal Kind, is process; it
 appears and it perishes; in reality it never possesses Being, but is
 merely protected, in so far as it has the capacity, by participating
 in what authentically is.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. (14) Over against that body, stands the principle which is
 self-caused, which is all that neither enters into being nor passes
 away, the principle whose dissolution would mean the end of 
 all things
 never to be restored if once this had ceased to be, the sustaining
 principle of things individually, and of this kosmos, which owes its
 maintenance and its ordered system to the soul.
 
 This is the starting point of motion and becomes the leader and
 provider of motion to all else: it moves by its own quality, 
 and every
 living material form owes life to this principle, which of itself
 lives in a life that, being essentially innate, can never fail.
 
 Not all things can have a life merely at second hand; this would
 give an infinite series: there must be some nature which, having
 life primally, shall be of necessity indestructible, immortal, as
 the source of life to all else that lives. This is the point at
 which all that is divine and blessed must be situated, living and
 having being of itself, possessing primal being and primal life, and
 in its own essence rejecting all change, neither coming to be nor
 passing away.
 
 Whence could such a being arise or into what could it disappear:
 the very word, strictly used, means that the thing is perdurable.
 Similarly white, the colour, cannot be now white and now not 
 white: if
 this "white" were a real being it would be eternal as well as being
 white: the colour is merely white but whatsoever possesses being,
 indwelling by nature and primal, will possess also eternal duration.
 In such an entity this primal and eternal Being cannot be dead like
 stone or plank: it must be alive, and that with a life unalloyed as
 long as it remains self-gathered: when the primal Being 
 blends with an
 inferior principle, it is hampered in its relation to the 
 highest, but
 without suffering the loss of its own nature since it can always
 recover its earliest state by turning its tendency back to its own.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. (15) That the soul is of the family of the diviner 
 nature, the
 eternal, is clear from our demonstration that it is not material:
 besides it has neither shape or colour nor is it tangible. But there
 are other proofs.
 
 Assuming that the divine and the authentically existent
 possesses a life beneficent and wise, we take the next step and
 begin with working out the nature of our own soul.
 
 Let us consider a soul, not one that has appropriated the
 unreasoned desires and impulses of the bodily life, or any other
 such emotion and experience, but one that has cast all this 
 aside, and
 as far as possible has no commerce with the bodily. Such a soul
 demonstrates that all evil is accretion, alien, and that in 
 the purged
 soul the noble things are immanent, wisdom and all else that is
 good, as its native store.
 
 If this is the soul once it has returned to its self, how deny
 that it is the nature we have identified with all the divine and
 eternal? Wisdom and authentic virtue are divine, and could not be
 found in the chattel mean and mortal: what possesses these must be
 divine by its very capacity of the divine, the token of 
 kinship and of
 identical substance.
 
 Hence, too, any one of us that exhibits these qualities will
 differ but little as far as soul is concerned from the Supernals; he
 will be less than they only to the extent in which the soul is, in
 him, associated with body.
 
 This is so true that, if every human being were at that stage,
 or if a great number lived by a soul of that degree, no one would be
 so incredulous as to doubt that the soul in man is immortal. It is
 because we see everywhere the spoiled souls of the great mass that
 it becomes difficult to recognize their divinity and immortality.
 
 To know the nature of a thing we must observe it in its
 unalloyed state, since any addition obscures the reality. Clear,
 then look: or, rather, let a man first purify himself and then
 observe: he will not doubt his immortality when he sees himself thus
 entered into the pure, the Intellectual. For, what he sees is an
 Intellectual-Principle looking on nothing of sense, nothing of this
 mortality, but by its own eternity having intellection of 
 the eternal:
 he will see all things in this Intellectual substance, himself
 having become an Intellectual Kosmos and all lightsome, 
 illuminated by
 the truth streaming from The Good, which radiates truth upon all
 that stands within that realm of the divine.
 
 Thus he will often feel the beauty of that word 
 "Farewell: I am to
 you an immortal God," for he has ascended to the Supreme, and is all
 one strain to enter into likeness with it.
 
 If the purification puts the human into knowledge of the
 highest, then, too, the science latent within becomes manifest, the
 only authentic knowing. For it is not by running hither and thither
 outside of itself that the soul understands morality and right
 conduct: it learns them of its own nature, in its contact 
 with itself,
 in its intellectual grasp of itself, seeing deeply impressed upon it
 the images of its primal state; what was one mass of rust from long
 neglect it has restored to purity.
 
 Imagine living gold: it files away all that is earthy about it,
 all that kept it in self-ignorance preventing it from knowing itself
 as gold; seen now unalloyed it is at once filled with admiration of
 its worth and knows that it has no need of any other glory than its
 own, triumphant if only it be allowed to remain purely to itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. (16) What intelligent mind can doubt the immortality 
 of such a
 value, one in which there is a life self-springing and therefore not
 to be destroyed?
 
 This is at any rate a life not imported from without, not
 present in the mode of the heat in fire- for if heat is 
 characteristic
 of the fire proper, it certainly is adventitious to the Matter
 underlying the fire; or fire, too, would be everlasting- it is not
 in any such mode that the soul has life: this is no case of a Matter
 underlying and a life brought into that Matter and making it 
 into soul
 [as heat comes into matter and makes it fire].
 
 Either life is Essential Reality, and therefore self-living- the
 very thing we have been seeking- and undeniably immortal: or it,
 too, is a compound and must be traced back through all the
 constituents until an immortal substance is reached, something
 deriving movement from itself, and therefore debarred from accepting
 death.
 
 Even supposing life could be described as a condition 
 imposed upon
 Matter, still the source from which this condition entered the
 Matter must necessarily be admitted to be immortal simply by being
 unable to take into itself the opposite of the life which it conveys.
 
 Of course, life is no such mere condition, but an independent
 principle, effectively living.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. (17) A further consideration is that if every soul is to be
 held dissoluble the universe must long since have ceased to be: if
 it is pretended that one kind of soul, our own for example, 
 is mortal,
 and another, that of the All, let us suppose, is immortal, we demand
 to know the reason of the difference alleged.
 
 Each is a principle of motion, each is self-living, each touches
 the same sphere by the same tentacles, each has intellection of the
 celestial order and of the super-celestial, each is seeking to win
 to what has essential being, each is moving upwards to the primal
 source.
 
 Again: the soul's understanding of the Absolute Forms by means
 of the visions stored up in it is effected within itself; such
 perception is reminiscence; the soul then must have its being before
 embodiment, and drawing on an eternal science, must itself 
 be eternal.
 
 Every dissoluble entity, that has come to be by way of
 groupment, must in the nature of things be broken apart by that very
 mode which brought it together: but the soul is one and simplex,
 living not in the sense of potential reception of life but by its
 own energy; and this can be no cause of dissolution.
 
 But, we will be told, it tends to destruction by having been
 divided (in the body) and so becoming fragmentary.
 
 No: the soul, as we have shown, is not a mass, not a quantity.
 
 May not it change and so come to destruction?
 
 No: the change that destroys annuls the form but leaves the
 underlying substance: and that could not happen to anything except a
 compound.
 
 If it can be destroyed in no such ways, it is necessarily
 indestructible.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. (18) But how does the soul enter into body from the
 aloofness of the Intellectual?
 
 There is the Intellectual-Principle which remains among the
 intellectual beings, living the purely intellective life; and this,
 knowing no impulse or appetite, is for ever stationary in that
 Realm. But immediately following upon it, there is that which has
 acquired appetite and, by this accruement, has already taken a great
 step outward; it has the desire of elaborating order on the model of
 what it has seen in the Intellectual-Principle: pregnant by those
 Beings, and in pain to the birth, it is eager to make, to create. In
 this new zest it strains towards the realm of sense: thus, while
 this primal soul in union with the Soul of the All transcends the
 sphere administered, it is inevitably turned outward, and has added
 the universe to its concern: yet in choosing to administer 
 the partial
 and exiling itself to enter the place in which it finds its
 appropriate task, it still is not wholly and exclusively 
 held by body:
 it is still in possession of the unembodied; and the
 Intellectual-Principle in it remains immune. As a whole it is partly
 in body, partly outside: it has plunged from among the primals and
 entered this sphere of tertiaries: the process has been an 
 activity of
 the Intellectual-Principle, which thus, while itself remaining in
 its identity, operates throughout the soul to flood the universe
 with beauty and penetrant order- immortal mind, eternal in its
 unfailing energy, acting through immortal soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. (19) As for the souls of the other living beings, fallen to
 the degree of entering brute bodies, these too must be immortal. And
 if there is in the animal world any other phase of soul, its only
 possible origin, since it is the life-giver, is, still, that one
 principle of life: so too with the soul in the vegetal order.
 
 All have sprung from one source, all have life as their own, all
 are incorporeal, indivisible, all are real-beings.
 
 If we are told that man's soul being tripartite must as 
 a compound
 entity be dissolved, our answer shall be that pure souls upon their
 emancipation will put away all that has fastened to them at 
 birth, all
 that increment which the others will long retain.
 
 But even that inferior phase thus laid aside will not be 
 destroyed
 as long as its source continues to exist, for nothing from the realm
 of real being shall pass away.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. (20) Thus far we have offered the considerations appropriate
 to those asking for demonstration: those whose need is conviction by
 evidence of the more material order are best met from the abundant
 records relevant to the subject: there are also the oracles of the
 Gods ordering the appeasing of wronged souls and the honouring of
 the dead as still sentient, a practice common to all mankind: and
 again, not a few souls, once among men, have continued to serve them
 after quitting the body and by revelations, practically helpful,
 make clear, as well, that the other souls, too, have not 
 ceased to be.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 EIGHTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 THE SOUL'S DESCENT INTO BODY.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Many times it has happened: Lifted out of the body 
 into myself;
 becoming external to all other things and self-encentered; 
 beholding a
 marvellous beauty; then, more than ever, assured of 
 community with the
 loftiest order; enacting the noblest life, acquiring 
 identity with the
 divine; stationing within It by having attained that activity;
 poised above whatsoever within the Intellectual is less than the
 Supreme: yet, there comes the moment of descent from intellection to
 reasoning, and after that sojourn in the divine, I ask myself how it
 happens that I can now be descending, and how did the soul ever
 enter into my body, the soul which, even within the body, is the
 high thing it has shown itself to be.
 
 Heraclitus, who urges the examination of this matter, tells of
 compulsory alternation from contrary to contrary, speaks of 
 ascent and
 descent, says that "change reposes," and that "it is 
 weariness to keep
 toiling at the same things and always beginning again"; but he seems
 to teach by metaphor, not concerning himself about making 
 his doctrine
 clear to us, probably with the idea that it is for us to seek within
 ourselves as he sought for himself and found.
 
 Empedocles- where he says that it is law for faulty souls to
 descend to this sphere, and that he himself was here because 
 he turned
 a deserter, wandered from God, in slavery to a raving 
 discord- reveals
 neither more nor less than Pythagoras and his school seem to me to
 convey on this as on many other matters; but in his case,
 versification has some part in the obscurity.
 
 We have to fall back on the illustrious Plato, who uttered many
 noble sayings about the soul, and has in many places dwelt upon its
 entry into body so that we may well hope to get some light from him.
 
 What do we learn from this philosopher?
 
 We will not find him so consistent throughout that it is easy to
 discover his mind.
 
 Everywhere, no doubt, he expresses contempt for all that is of
 sense, blames the commerce of the soul with body as an 
 enchainment, an
 entombment, and upholds as a great truth the saying of the Mysteries
 that the soul is here a prisoner. In the Cavern of Plato and in the
 Cave of Empedocles, I discern this universe, where the 
 breaking of the
 fetters and the ascent from the depths are figures of the wayfaring
 toward the Intellectual Realm.
 
 In the Phaedrus he makes a failing of the wings the cause of the
 entry to this realm: and there are Periods which send back the soul
 after it has risen; there are judgements and lots and fates and
 necessities driving other souls down to this order.
 
 In all these explanations, he finds guilt in the arrival of the
 soul at body, But treating, in the Timaeus, of our universe he
 exalts the kosmos and entitles it a blessed god, and holds that the
 soul was given by the goodness of the creator to the end that the
 total of things might be possessed of intellect, for thus 
 intellectual
 it was planned to be, and thus it cannot be except through 
 soul. There
 is a reason, then, why the soul of this All should be sent into it
 from God: in the same way the soul of each single one of us is sent,
 that the universe may be complete; it was necessary that all 
 beings of
 the Intellectual should be tallied by just so many forms of living
 creatures here in the realm of sense.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Enquiring, then, of Plato as to our own soul, we find 
 ourselves
 forced to enquire into the nature of soul in general- to 
 discover what
 there can be in its character to bring it into partnership with
 body, and, again, what this kosmos must be in which, willing 
 unwilling
 or in any way at all, soul has its activity.
 
 We have to face also the question as to whether the Creator has
 planned well or ill...... like our souls, which it may be, are such
 that governing their inferior, the body, they must sink deeper and
 deeper into it if they are to control it.
 
 No doubt the individual body- though in all cases appropriately
 placed within the universe- is of itself in a state of dissolution,
 always on the way to its natural terminus, demanding much irksome
 forethought to save it from every kind of outside assailant, always
 gripped by need, requiring every help against constant 
 difficulty: but
 the body inhabited by the World-Soul- complete, competent,
 self-sufficing, exposed to nothing contrary to its nature- this
 needs no more than a brief word of command, while the governing soul
 is undeviatingly what its nature makes it wish to be, and, amenable
 neither to loss nor to addition, knows neither desire nor distress.
 
 This is how we come to read that our soul, entering into
 association with that complete soul and itself thus made perfect,
 walks the lofty ranges, administering the entire kosmos, and that as
 long as it does not secede and is neither inbound to body nor held
 in any sort of servitude, so long it tranquilly bears its part in
 the governance of the All, exactly like the world-soul itself; for
 in fact it suffers no hurt whatever by furnishing body with the
 power to existence, since not every form of care for the 
 inferior need
 wrest the providing soul from its own sure standing in the highest.
 
 The soul's care for the universe takes two forms: there is the
 supervising of the entire system, brought to order by 
 deedless command
 in a kindly presidence, and there is that over the individual,
 implying direct action, the hand to the task, one might say, in
 immediate contact: in the second kind of care the agent absorbs much
 of the nature of its object.
 
 Now in its comprehensive government of the heavenly system, the
 soul's method is that of an unbroken transcendence in its highest
 phases, with penetration by its lower power: at this, God can no
 longer be charged with lowering the All-Soul, which has not been
 deprived of its natural standing and from eternity possesses and
 will unchangeably possess that rank and habit which could never have
 been intruded upon it against the course of nature but must be its
 characteristic quality, neither failing ever nor ever beginning.
 
 Where we read that the souls or stars stand to their bodily
 forms as the All to the material forms within it- for these starry
 bodies are declared to be members of the soul's circuit- we are
 given to understand that the star-souls also enjoy the blissful
 condition of transcendence and immunity that becomes them.
 
 And so we might expect: commerce with the body is repudiated for
 two only reasons, as hindering the soul's intellective act and as
 filling with pleasure, desire, pain; but neither of these
 misfortunes can befall a soul which has never deeply penetrated into
 the body, is not a slave but a sovereign ruling a body of such an
 order as to have no need and no shortcoming and therefore to give
 ground for neither desire nor fear.
 
 There is no reason why it should be expectant of evil with
 regard to such a body nor is there any such preoccupied concern,
 bringing about a veritable descent, as to withdraw it from 
 its noblest
 and most blessed vision; it remains always intent upon the Supreme,
 and its governance of this universe is effected by a power 
 not calling
 upon act.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. The Human Soul, next;
 
 Everywhere we hear of it as in bitter and miserable durance in
 body, a victim to troubles and desires and fears and all forms of
 evil, the body its prison or its tomb, the kosmos its cave or cavern.
 
 Now this does not clash with the first theory [that of the
 impassivity of soul as in the All]; for the descent of the human
 Soul has not been due to the same causes [as that of the All-Soul.]
 
 All that is Intellectual-Principle has its being- whole and all-
 in the place of Intellection, what we call the Intellectual Kosmos:
 but there exist, too, the intellective powers included in its being,
 and the separate intelligences- for the Intellectual-Principle is
 not merely one; it is one and many. In the same way there 
 must be both
 many souls and one, the one being the source of the differing many
 just as from one genus there rise various species, better and worse,
 some of the more intellectual order, others less effectively so.
 
 In the Intellectual-Principle a distinction is to be made: there
 is the Intellectual-Principle itself, which like some huge living
 organism contains potentially all the other forms; and there are the
 forms thus potentially included now realized as individuals. We may
 think of it as a city which itself has soul and life, and includes,
 also, other forms of life; the living city is the more perfect and
 powerful, but those lesser forms, in spite of all, share in the one
 same living quality: or, another illustration, from fire, the
 universal, proceed both the great fire and the minor fires; yet all
 have the one common essence, that of fire the universal, or, more
 exactly, participate in that from which the essence of the universal
 fire proceeds.
 
 No doubt the task of the soul, in its more emphatically
 reasoning phase, is intellection: but it must have another 
 as well, or
 it would be undistinguishable from the Intellectual-Principle. To
 its quality of being intellective it adds the quality by which it
 attains its particular manner of being: remaining, therefore, an
 Intellectual-Principle, it has thenceforth its own task too, as
 everything must that exists among real beings.
 
 It looks towards its higher and has intellection; towards itself
 and conserves its peculiar being; towards its lower and orders,
 administers, governs.
 
 The total of things could not have remained stationary in the
 Intellectual Kosmos, once there was the possibility of continuous
 variety, of beings inferior but as necessarily existent as their
 superiors.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. So it is with the individual souls; the appetite for 
 the divine
 Intellect urges them to return to their source, but they have, too,
 a power apt to administration in this lower sphere; they may be
 compared to the light attached upwards to the sun, but not grudging
 its presidency to what lies beneath it. In the Intellectual, then,
 they remain with soul-entire, and are immune from care and 
 trouble; in
 the heavenly sphere, absorbed in the soul-entire, they are
 administrators with it just as kings, associated with the supreme
 ruler and governing with him, do not descend from their kingly
 stations: the souls indeed [as distinguished from the 
 kosmos] are thus
 far in the one place with their overlord; but there comes a stage at
 which they descend from the universal to become partial and
 self-centred; in a weary desire of standing apart they find 
 their way,
 each to a place of its very own. This state long maintained, the
 soul is a deserter from the All; its differentiation has severed it;
 its vision is no longer set in the Intellectual; it is a partial
 thing, isolated, weakened, full of care, intent upon the fragment;
 severed from the whole, it nestles in one form of being; for this,
 it abandons all else, entering into and caring for only the 
 one, for a
 thing buffeted about by a worldful of things: thus it has 
 drifted away
 from the universal and, by an actual presence, it administers the
 particular; it is caught into contact now, and tends to the outer to
 which it has become present and into whose inner depths it
 henceforth sinks far.
 
 With this comes what is known as the casting of the wings, the
 enchaining in body: the soul has lost that innocency of 
 conducting the
 higher which it knew when it stood with the All-Soul, that earlier
 state to which all its interest would bid it hasten back.
 
 It has fallen: it is at the chain: debarred from 
 expressing itself
 now through its intellectual phase, it operates through 
 sense, it is a
 captive; this is the burial, the encavernment, of the Soul.
 
 But in spite of all it has, for ever, something 
 transcendent: by a
 conversion towards the intellective act, it is loosed from the
 shackles and soars- when only it makes its memories the 
 starting point
 of a new vision of essential being. Souls that take this way have
 place in both spheres, living of necessity the life there 
 and the life
 here by turns, the upper life reigning in those able to consort more
 continuously with the divine Intellect, the lower dominant where
 character or circumstances are less favourable.
 
 All this is indicated by Plato, without emphasis, where he
 distinguishes those of the second mixing-bowl, describes them as
 "parts," and goes on to say that, having in this way become partial,
 they must of necessity experience birth.
 
 Of course, where he speaks of God sowing them, he is to be
 understood as when he tells of God speaking and delivering orations;
 what is rooted in the nature of the All is figuratively treated as
 coming into being by generation and creation: stage and sequence are
 transferred, for clarity of exposition, to things whose being and
 definite form are eternal.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. It is possible to reconcile all these apparent
 contradictions- the divine sowing to birth, as opposed to a
 voluntary descent aiming at the completion of the universe; the
 judgement and the cave; necessity and free choice- in fact the
 necessity includes the choice-embodiment as an evil; the Empedoclean
 teaching of a flight from God, a wandering away, a sin bringing its
 punishment; the "solace by flight" of Heraclitus; in a word a
 voluntary descent which is also voluntary.
 
 All degeneration is no doubt involuntary, yet when it has been
 brought about by an inherent tendency, that submission to 
 the inferior
 may be described as the penalty of an act.
 
 On the other hand these experiences and actions are determined
 by an external law of nature, and they are due to the movement of a
 being which in abandoning its superior is running out to serve the
 needs of another: hence there is no inconsistency or untruth 
 in saying
 that the soul is sent down by God; final results are always to be
 referred to the starting point even across many intervening stages.
 
 Still there is a twofold flaw: the first lies in the 
 motive of the
 Soul's descent [its audacity, its Tolma], and the second in the evil
 it does when actually here: the first is punished by what 
 the soul has
 suffered by its descent: for the faults committed here, the lesser
 penalty is to enter into body after body- and soon to return- by
 judgement according to desert, the word judgement indicating a
 divine ordinance; but any outrageous form of ill-doing incurs a
 proportionately greater punishment administered under the 
 surveillance
 of chastising daimons.
 
 Thus, in sum, the soul, a divine being and a dweller in the
 loftier realms, has entered body; it is a god, a later phase of the
 divine: but, under stress of its powers and of its tendency to bring
 order to its next lower, it penetrates to this sphere in a voluntary
 plunge: if it turns back quickly, all is well; it will have taken no
 hurt by acquiring the knowledge of evil and coming to understand
 what sin is, by bringing its forces into manifest play, by
 exhibiting those activities and productions which, remaining merely
 potential in the unembodied, might as well never have been 
 even there,
 if destined never to come into actuality, so that the soul itself
 would never have known that suppressed and inhibited total.
 
 The act reveals the power, a power hidden, and we might 
 almost say
 obliterated or nonexistent, unless at some moment it became 
 effective:
 in the world as it is, the richness of the outer stirs us all to the
 wonder of the inner whose greatness is displayed in acts so splendid.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. Something besides a unity there must be or all would be
 indiscernibly buried, shapeless within that unbroken whole: none of
 the real beings [of the Intellectual Kosmos] would exist if 
 that unity
 remained at halt within itself: the plurality of these beings,
 offspring of the unity, could not exist without their own nexts
 taking the outward path; these are the beings holding the rank of
 souls.
 
 In the same way the outgoing process could not end with 
 the souls,
 their issue stifled: every Kind must produce its next; it must
 unfold from some concentrated central principle as from a 
 seed, and so
 advance to its term in the varied forms of sense. The prior in its
 being will remain unalterably in the native seat; but there is the
 lower phase, begotten to it by an ineffable faculty of its being,
 native to soul as it exists in the Supreme.
 
 To this power we cannot impute any halt, any limit of jealous
 grudging; it must move for ever outward until the universe stands
 accomplished to the ultimate possibility. All, thus, is 
 produced by an
 inexhaustible power giving its gift to the universe, no part of
 which it can endure to see without some share in its being.
 
 There is, besides, no principle that can prevent anything from
 partaking, to the extent of its own individual receptivity in the
 Nature of Good. If therefore Matter has always existed, that 
 existence
 is enough to ensure its participation in the being which, 
 according to
 each receptivity, communicates the supreme good universally: 
 if on the
 contrary, Matter has come into being as a necessary sequence of the
 causes preceding it, that origin would similarly prevent it standing
 apart from the scheme as though it were out of reach of the
 principle to whose grace it owes its existence.
 
 In sum: The loveliness that is in the sense-realm is an index of
 the nobleness of the Intellectual sphere, displaying its 
 power and its
 goodness alike: and all things are for ever linked; the one order
 Intellectual in its being, the other of sense; one self-existent,
 the other eternally taking its being by participation in that first,
 and to the full of its power reproducing the Intellectual nature.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. The Kind, then, with which we are dealing is twofold, the
 Intellectual against the sensible: better for the soul to 
 dwell in the
 Intellectual, but, given its proper nature, it is under compulsion
 to participate in the sense-realm also. There is no grievance in its
 not being, through and through, the highest; it holds mid-rank among
 the authentic existences, being of divine station but at the lowest
 extreme of the Intellectual and skirting the sense-known 
 nature; thus,
 while it communicates to this realm something of its own store, it
 absorbs in turn whenever- instead of employing in its government
 only its safeguarded phase- it plunges in an excessive zeal to the
 very midst of its chosen sphere; then it abandons its status as
 whole soul with whole soul, though even thus it is always able to
 recover itself by turning to account the experience of what it has
 seen and suffered here, learning, so, the greatness of rest in the
 Supreme, and more clearly discerning the finer things by comparison
 with what is almost their direct antithesis. Where the faculty is
 incapable of knowing without contact, the experience of evil brings
 the dearer perception of Good.
 
 The outgoing that takes place in the Intellectual-Principle is a
 descent to its own downward ultimate: it cannot be a movement to the
 transcendent; operating necessarily outwards from itself, wherein it
 may not stay inclosed, the need and law of Nature bring it to its
 extreme term, to soul- to which it entrusts all the later stages of
 being while itself turns back on its course.
 
 The soul's operation is similar: its next lower act is this
 universe: its immediate higher is the contemplation of the Authentic
 Existences. To individual souls such divine operation takes 
 place only
 at one of their phases and by a temporal process when from the lower
 in which they reside they turn towards the noblest; but that soul,
 which we know as the All-Soul, has never entered the lower activity,
 but, immune from evil, has the property of knowing its lower by
 inspection, while it still cleaves continuously to the beings above
 itself; thus its double task becomes possible; it takes thence and,
 since as soul it cannot escape touching this sphere, it gives hither.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. And- if it is desirable to venture the more definite
 statement of a personal conviction clashing with the general view-
 even our human soul has not sunk entire; something of it is
 continuously in the Intellectual Realm, though if that part, which
 is in this sphere of sense, hold the mastery, or rather be mastered
 here and troubled, it keeps us blind to what the upper phase holds
 in contemplation.
 
 The object of the Intellectual Act comes within our ken only
 when it reaches downward to the level of sensation: for not all that
 occurs at any part of the soul is immediately known to us; a thing
 must, for that knowledge, be present to the total soul; thus desire
 locked up within the desiring faculty remains unknown except when we
 make it fully ours by the central faculty of perception, or by the
 individual choice or by both at once. Once more, every soul has
 something of the lower on the body side and something of the 
 higher on
 the side of the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 The Soul of the All, as an entirety, governs the universe
 through that part of it which leans to the body side, but since it
 does not exercise a will based on calculation as we do- but proceeds
 by purely intellectual act as in the execution of an artistic
 conception- its ministrance is that of a labourless overpoising,
 only its lowest phase being active upon the universe it embellishes.
 
 The souls that have gone into division and become appropriated
 to some thing partial have also their transcendent phase, but are
 preoccupied by sensation, and in the mere fact of exercising
 perception they take in much that clashes with their nature 
 and brings
 distress and trouble since the object of their concern is partial,
 deficient, exposed to many alien influences, filled with desires of
 its own and taking its pleasure, that pleasure which is its lure.
 
 But there is always the other, that which finds no savour in
 passing pleasure, but holds its own even way.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 NINTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ARE ALL SOULS ONE?.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. That the Soul of every individual is one thing we deduce from
 the fact that it is present entire at every point of the body- the
 sign of veritable unity- not some part of it here and another part
 there. In all sensitive beings the sensitive soul is an omnipresent
 unity, and so in the forms of vegetal life the vegetal soul is
 entire at each several point throughout the organism.
 
 Now are we to hold similarly that your soul and mine and all are
 one, and that the same thing is true of the universe, the soul in
 all the several forms of life being one soul, not parcelled out in
 separate items, but an omnipresent identity?
 
 If the soul in me is a unity, why need that in the universe be
 otherwise seeing that there is no longer any question of 
 bulk or body?
 And if that, too, is one soul and yours, and mine, belongs 
 to it, then
 yours and mine must also be one: and if, again, the soul of the
 universe and mine depend from one soul, once more all must be one.
 
 What then in itself is this one soul?
 
 First we must assure ourselves of the possibility of all souls
 being one as that of any given individual is.
 
 It must, no doubt, seem strange that my soul and that of any and
 everybody else should be one thing only: it might mean my feelings
 being felt by someone else, my goodness another's too, my desire,
 his desire, all our experience shared with each other and with the
 (one-souled) universe, so that the very universe itself would feel
 whatever I felt.
 
 Besides how are we to reconcile this unity with the 
 distinction of
 reasoning soul and unreasoning, animal soul and vegetal?
 
 Yet if we reject that unity, the universe itself ceases to be
 one thing and souls can no longer be included under any one 
 principle.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Now to begin with, the unity of soul, mine and another's, is
 not enough to make the two totals of soul and body identical. An
 identical thing in different recipients will have different
 experiences; the identity Man, in me as I move and you at rest,
 moves in me and is stationary in you: there is nothing stranger,
 nothing impossible, in any other form of identity between you and
 me; nor would it entail the transference of my emotion to any
 outside point: when in any one body a hand is in pain, the 
 distress is
 felt not in the other but in the hand as represented in the
 centralizing unity.
 
 In order that my feelings should of necessity be yours, the
 unity would have to be corporeal: only if the two recipient bodies
 made one, would the souls feel as one.
 
 We must keep in mind, moreover, that many things that happen
 even in one same body escape the notice of the entire being,
 especially when the bulk is large: thus in huge sea-beasts, it is
 said, the animal as a whole will be quite unaffected by some
 membral accident too slight to traverse the organism.
 
 Thus unity in the subject of any experience does not imply that
 the resultant sensation will be necessarily felt with any force upon
 the entire being and at every point of it: some transmission of the
 experience may be expected, and is indeed undeniable, but a full
 impression on the sense there need not be.
 
 That one identical soul should be virtuous in me and vicious in
 someone else is not strange: it is only saying that an 
 identical thing
 may be active here and inactive there.
 
 We are not asserting the unity of soul in the sense of a
 complete negation of multiplicity- only of the Supreme can that be
 affirmed- we are thinking of soul as simultaneously one and many,
 participant in the nature divided in body, but at the same time a
 unity by virtue of belonging to that Order which suffers no division.
 
 In myself some experience occurring in a part of the 
 body may take
 no effect upon the entire man but anything occurring in the higher
 reaches would tell upon the partial: in the same way any influx from
 the All upon the individual will have manifest effect since 
 the points
 of sympathetic contact are numerous- but as to any operation from
 ourselves upon the All there can be no certainty.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Yet, looking at another set of facts, reflection tells us
 that we are in sympathetic relation to each other, suffering,
 overcome, at the sight of pain, naturally drawn to forming
 attachments; and all this can be due only to some unity among us.
 
 Again, if spells and other forms of magic are efficient even at
 a distance to attract us into sympathetic relations, the 
 agency can be
 no other than the one soul.
 
 A quiet word induces changes in a remote object, and makes
 itself heard at vast distances- proof of the oneness of all things
 within the one soul.
 
 But how reconcile this unity with the existence of a reasoning
 soul, an unreasoning, even a vegetal soul?
 
 [It is a question of powers]: the indivisible phase is classed
 as reasoning because it is not in division among bodies, but there
 is the later phase, divided among bodies, but still one thing and
 distinct only so as to secure sense-perception throughout; this is
 to be classed as yet another power; and there is the forming and
 making phase which again is a power. But a variety of powers does
 not conflict with unity; seed contains many powers and yet it is one
 thing, and from that unity rises, again, a variety which is also a
 unity.
 
 But why are not all the powers of this unity present everywhere?
 
 The answer is that even in the case of the individual soul
 described, similarly, as permeating its body, sensation is 
 not equally
 present in all the parts, reason does not operate at every point,
 the principle of growth is at work where there is no sensation- and
 yet all these powers join in the one soul when the body is 
 laid aside.
 
 The nourishing faculty as dependent from the All belongs also to
 the All-Soul: why then does it not come equally from ours?
 
 Because what is nourished by the action of this power is a
 member of the All, which itself has sensation passively; but the
 perception, which is an intellectual judgement, is individual and
 has no need to create what already exists, though it would have done
 so had the power not been previously included, of necessity, in
 the nature of the All.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. These reflections should show that there is nothing strange
 in that reduction of all souls to one. But it is still necessary to
 enquire into the mode and conditions of the unity.
 
 Is it the unity of origin in a unity? And if so, is the one
 divided or does it remain entire and yet produce variety? and how
 can an essential being, while remaining its one self, bring forth
 others?
 
 Invoking God to become our helper, let us assert, that the very
 existence of many souls makes certain that there is first one from
 which the many rise.
 
 Let us suppose, even, the first soul to be corporeal.
 
 Then [by the nature of body] the many souls could result 
 only from
 the splitting up of that entity, each an entirely different 
 substance:
 if this body-soul be uniform in kind, each of the resultant 
 souls must
 be of the one kind; they will all carry the one Form undividedly and
 will differ only in their volumes. Now, if their being souls
 depended upon their volumes they would be distinct; but if it is
 ideal-form that makes them souls, then all are, in virtue of this
 Idea, one.
 
 But this is simply saying that there is one identical soul
 dispersed among many bodies, and that, preceding this, there is yet
 another not thus dispersed, the source of the soul in 
 dispersion which
 may be thought of as a widely repeated image of the soul in unity-
 much as a multitude of seals bear the impression of one ring. By
 that first mode the soul is a unit broken up into a variety 
 of points:
 in the second mode it is incorporeal. Similarly if the soul were a
 condition or modification of body, we could not wonder that this
 quality- this one thing from one source- should be present in many
 objects. The same reasoning would apply if soul were an effect [or
 manifestation] of the Conjoint.
 
 We, of course, hold it to be bodiless, an essential existence.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. How then can a multitude of essential beings be really one?
 
 Obviously either the one essence will be entire in all, or the
 many will rise from a one which remains unaltered and yet 
 includes the
 one- many in virtue of giving itself, without 
 self-abandonment, to its
 own multiplication.
 
 It is competent thus to give and remain, because while it
 penetrates all things it can never itself be sundered: this is an
 identity in variety.
 
 There is no reason for dismissing this explanation: we may think
 of a science with its constituents standing as one total, the source
 of all those various elements: again, there is the seed, a whole,
 producing those new parts in which it comes to its division; each of
 the new growths is a whole while the whole remains undiminished:
 only the material element is under the mode of part, and all the
 multiplicity remains an entire identity still.
 
 It may be objected that in the case of science the constituents
 are not each the whole.
 
 But even in the science, while the constituent selected for
 handling to meet a particular need is present actually and takes the
 lead, still all the other constituents accompany it in a potential
 presence, so that the whole is in every part: only in this sense [of
 particular attention] is the whole science distinguished from the
 part: all, we may say, is here simultaneously effected: each part is
 at your disposal as you choose to take it; the part invites the
 immediate interest, but its value consists in its approach to the
 whole.
 
 The detail cannot be considered as something separate from the
 entire body of speculation: so treated it would have no technical or
 scientific value; it would be childish divagation. The one detail,
 when it is a matter of science, potentially includes all. 
 Grasping one
 such constituent of his science, the expert deduces the rest by
 force of sequence.
 
 [As a further illustration of unity in plurality] the
 geometrician, in his analysis, shows that the single proposition
 includes all the items that go to constitute it and all the
 propositions which can be developed from it.
 
 It is our feebleness that leads to doubt in these matters; the
 body obscures the truth, but There all stands out clear and separate.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THE FIFTH ENNEAD
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIRST TRACTATE.
 
 
 THE THREE INITIAL HYPOSTASES.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. What can it be that has brought the souls to forget 
 the father,
 God, and, though members of the Divine and entirely of that world,
 to ignore at once themselves and It?
 
 The evil that has overtaken them has its source in self-will, in
 the entry into the sphere of process, and in the primal
 differentiation with the desire for self ownership. They conceived a
 pleasure in this freedom and largely indulged their own motion; thus
 they were hurried down the wrong path, and in the end, drifting
 further and further, they came to lose even the thought of their
 origin in the Divine. A child wrenched young from home and brought
 up during many years at a distance will fail in knowledge of its
 father and of itself: the souls, in the same way, no longer discern
 either the divinity or their own nature; ignorance of their rank
 brings self-depreciation; they misplace their respect, honouring
 everything more than themselves; all their awe and admiration is for
 the alien, and, clinging to this, they have broken apart, as far as
 a soul may, and they make light of what they have deserted; their
 regard for the mundane and their disregard of themselves bring about
 their utter ignoring of the divine.
 
 Admiring pursuit of the external is a confession of inferiority;
 and nothing thus holding itself inferior to things that rise and
 perish, nothing counting itself less honourable and less 
 enduring than
 all else it admires could ever form any notion of either the 
 nature or
 the power of God.
 
 A double discipline must be applied if human beings in this pass
 are to be reclaimed, and brought back to their origins, lifted once
 more towards the Supreme and One and First.
 
 There is the method, which we amply exhibit elsewhere, declaring
 the dishonour of the objects which the Soul holds here in honour;
 the second teaches or recalls to the soul its race and worth; this
 latter is the leading truth, and, clearly brought out, is 
 the evidence
 of the other.
 
 It must occupy us now for it bears closely upon our enquiry to
 which it is the natural preliminary: the seeker is soul and it must
 start from a true notion of the nature and quality by which soul may
 undertake the search; it must study itself in order to learn whether
 it has the faculty for the enquiry, the eye for the object proposed,
 whether in fact we ought to seek; for if the object is alien the
 search must be futile, while if there is relationship the solution
 of our problem is at once desirable and possible.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Let every soul recall, then, at the outset the truth that
 soul is the author of all living things, that it has 
 breathed the life
 into them all, whatever is nourished by earth and sea, all the
 creatures of the air, the divine stars in the sky; it is the maker
 of the sun; itself formed and ordered this vast heaven and conducts
 all that rhythmic motion; and it is a principle distinct from all
 these to which it gives law and movement and life, and it must of
 necessity be more honourable than they, for they gather or 
 dissolve as
 soul brings them life or abandons them, but soul, since it never can
 abandon itself, is of eternal being.
 
 How life was purveyed to the universe of things and to the
 separate beings in it may be thus conceived:
 
 That great soul must stand pictured before another soul, one not
 mean, a soul that has become worthy to look, emancipate from 
 the lure,
 from all that binds its fellows in bewitchment, holding itself in
 quietude. Let not merely the enveloping body be at peace, body's
 turmoil stilled, but all that lies around, earth at peace, and sea
 at peace, and air and the very heavens. Into that heaven, 
 all at rest,
 let the great soul be conceived to roll inward at every point,
 penetrating, permeating, from all sides pouring in its light. As the
 rays of the sun throwing their brilliance upon a lowering cloud make
 it gleam all gold, so the soul entering the material expanse of the
 heavens has given life, has given immortality: what was abject it
 has lifted up; and the heavenly system, moved now in endless 
 motion by
 the soul that leads it in wisdom, has become a living and a blessed
 thing; the soul domiciled within, it takes worth where, before the
 soul, it was stark body- clay and water- or, rather, the blankness
 of Matter, the absence of Being, and, as an author says, "the
 execration of the Gods."
 
 The Soul's nature and power will be brought out more 
 clearly, more
 brilliantly, if we consider next how it envelops the heavenly system
 and guides all to its purposes: for it has bestowed itself upon all
 that huge expanse so that every interval, small and great alike, all
 has been ensouled.
 
 The material body is made up of parts, each holding its 
 own place,
 some in mutual opposition and others variously interdependent; the
 soul is in no such condition; it is not whittled down so that life
 tells of a part of the soul and springs where some such separate
 portion impinges; each separate life lives by the soul entire,
 omnipresent in the likeness of the engendering father, 
 entire in unity
 and entire in diffused variety. By the power of the soul the
 manifold and diverse heavenly system is a unit: through soul this
 universe is a God: and the sun is a God because it is 
 ensouled; so too
 the stars: and whatsoever we ourselves may be, it is all in virtue
 of soul; for "dead is viler than dung."
 
 This, by which the gods are divine, must be the oldest 
 God of them
 all: and our own soul is of that same Ideal nature, so that to
 consider it, purified, freed from all accruement, is to recognise in
 ourselves that same value which we have found soul to be, honourable
 above all that is bodily. For what is body but earth, and, 
 taking fire
 itself, what [but soul] is its burning power? So it is with all the
 compounds of earth and fire, even with water and air added to them?
 
 If, then, it is the presence of soul that brings worth, how can
 a man slight himself and run after other things? You honour the Soul
 elsewhere; honour then yourself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. The Soul once seen to be thus precious, thus divine, you may
 hold the faith that by its possession you are already nearing God:
 in the strength of this power make upwards towards Him: at no great
 distance you must attain: there is not much between.
 
 But over this divine, there is still a diviner: grasp the upward
 neighbour of the soul, its prior and source.
 
 Soul, for all the worth we have shown to belong to it, is yet a
 secondary, an image of the Intellectual-Principle: reason uttered is
 an image of the reason stored within the soul, and in the same way
 soul is an utterance of the Intellectual-Principle: it is even the
 total of its activity, the entire stream of life sent forth by that
 Principle to the production of further being; it is the forthgoing
 heat of a fire which has also heat essentially inherent. But within
 the Supreme we must see energy not as an overflow but in the double
 aspect of integral inherence with the establishment of a new being.
 Sprung, in other words, from the Intellectual-Principle, Soul is
 intellective, but with an intellection operation by the method of
 reasonings: for its perfecting it must look to that Divine 
 Mind, which
 may be thought of as a father watching over the development of his
 child born imperfect in comparison with himself.
 
 Thus its substantial existence comes from the
 Intellectual-Principle; and the Reason within it becomes Act 
 in virtue
 of its contemplation of that prior; for its thought and act are its
 own intimate possession when it looks to the Supreme Intelligence;
 those only are soul-acts which are of this intellective 
 nature and are
 determined by its own character; all that is less noble is foreign
 [traceable to Matter] and is accidental to the soul in the course of
 its peculiar task.
 
 In two ways, then, the Intellectual-Principle enhances the
 divine quality of the soul, as father and as immanent presence;
 nothing separates them but the fact that they are not one and the
 same, that there is succession, that over against a recipient there
 stands the ideal-form received; but this recipient, Matter to the
 Supreme Intelligence, is also noble as being at once informed by
 divine intellect and uncompounded.
 
 What the Intellectual-Principle must be is carried in the single
 word that Soul, itself so great, is still inferior.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. But there is yet another way to this knowledge:
 
 Admiring the world of sense as we look out upon its vastness and
 beauty and the order of its eternal march, thinking of the 
 gods within
 it, seen and hidden, and the celestial spirits and all the life of
 animal and plant, let us mount to its archetype, to the yet more
 authentic sphere: there we are to contemplate all things as 
 members of
 the Intellectual- eternal in their own right, vested with a
 self-springing consciousness and life- and, presiding over all
 these, the unsoiled Intelligence and the unapproachable wisdom.
 
 That archetypal world is the true Golden Age, age of Kronos, who
 is the Intellectual-Principle as being the offspring or exuberance
 of God. For here is contained all that is immortal: nothing here but
 is Divine Mind; all is God; this is the place of every soul. Here is
 rest unbroken: for how can that seek change, in which all is well;
 what need that reach to, which holds all within itself; what
 increase can that desire, which stands utterly achieved? All its
 content, thus, is perfect, that itself may be perfect throughout, as
 holding nothing that is less than the divine, nothing that is less
 than intellective. Its knowing is not by search but by 
 possession, its
 blessedness inherent, not acquired; for all belongs to it eternally
 and it holds the authentic Eternity imitated by Time which, circling
 round the Soul, makes towards the new thing and passes by the old.
 Soul deals with thing after thing- now Socrates; now a horse: always
 some one entity from among beings- but the Intellectual-Principle is
 all and therefore its entire content is simultaneously 
 present in that
 identity: this is pure being in eternal actuality; nowhere is there
 any future, for every then is a now; nor is there any past, for
 nothing there has ever ceased to be; everything has taken its stand
 for ever, an identity well pleased, we might say, to be as it is;
 and everything, in that entire content, is Intellectual-Principle
 and Authentic Existence; and the total of all is
 Intellectual-Principle entire and Being entire. 
 Intellectual-Principle
 by its intellective act establishes Being, which in turn, as the
 object of intellection, becomes the cause of intellection and of
 existence to the Intellectual-Principle- though, of course, there is
 another cause of intellection which is also a cause to Being, both
 rising in a source distinct from either.
 
 Now while these two are coalescents, having their existence in
 common, and are never apart, still the unity they form is two-sided;
 there is Intellectual-Principle as against Being, the intellectual
 agent as against the object of intellection; we consider the
 intellective act and we have the Intellectual-Principle; we think of
 the object of that act and we have Being.
 
 Such difference there must be if there is to be any
 intellection; but similarly there must also be identity [since, in
 perfect knowing, subject and object are identical.]
 
 Thus the Primals [the first "Categories"] are seen to be:
 Intellectual-Principle; Existence; Difference; Identity: we must
 include also Motion and Rest: Motion provides for the intellectual
 act, Rest preserves identity as Difference gives at once a Knower
 and a Known, for, failing this, all is one, and silent.
 
 So too the objects of intellection [the ideal content of the
 Divine Mind]- identical in virtue of the self-concentration of the
 principle which is their common ground- must still be distinct each
 from another; this distinction constitutes Difference.
 
 The Intellectual Kosmos thus a manifold, Number and Quantity
 arise: Quality is the specific character of each of these ideas
 which stand as the principles from which all else derives.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. As a manifold, then, this God, the Intellectual-Principle,
 exists within the Soul here, the Soul which once for all 
 stands linked
 a member of the divine, unless by a deliberate apostasy.
 
 Bringing itself close to the divine Intellect, becoming, as it
 were, one with this, it seeks still further: What Being, now, has
 engendered this God, what is the Simplex preceding this 
 multiple; what
 the cause at once of its existence and of its existing as a
 manifold; what the source of this Number, this Quantity?
 
 Number, Quantity, is not primal: obviously before even duality,
 there must stand the unity.
 
 The Dyad is a secondary; deriving from unity, it finds in unity
 the determinant needed by its native indetermination: once there is
 any determination, there is Number, in the sense, of course, of the
 real [the archetypal] Number. And the soul is such a number or
 quantity. For the Primals are not masses or magnitudes; all of that
 gross order is later, real only to the sense-thought; even 
 in seed the
 effective reality is not the moist substance but the unseen- that is
 to say Number [as the determinant of individual being] and the
 Reason-Principle [of the product to be].
 
 Thus by what we call the Number and the Dyad of that 
 higher realm,
 we mean Reason Principles and the Intellectual-Principle: but while
 the Dyad is, as regards that sphere, undetermined- 
 representing, as it
 were, the underly [or Matter] of The One- the later Number [or
 Quantity]- that which rises from the Dyad 
 [Intellectual-Principle] and
 The One- is not Matter to the later existents but is their
 forming-Idea, for all of them take shape, so to speak, from the
 ideas rising within this. The determination of the Dyad is brought
 about partly from its object- The One- and partly from itself, as is
 the case with all vision in the act of sight: intellection 
 [the Act of
 the Dyad] is vision occupied upon The One.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. But how and what does the Intellectual-Principle see and,
 especially, how has it sprung from that which is to become the
 object of its vision?
 
 The mind demands the existence of these Beings, but it 
 is still in
 trouble over the problem endlessly debated by the most ancient
 philosophers: from such a unity as we have declared The One 
 to be, how
 does anything at all come into substantial existence, any
 multiplicity, dyad, or number? Why has the Primal not remained
 self-gathered so that there be none of this profusion of the
 manifold which we observe in existence and yet are compelled to
 trace to that absolute unity?
 
 In venturing an answer, we first invoke God Himself, not in loud
 word but in that way of prayer which is always within our power,
 leaning in soul towards Him by aspiration, alone towards the alone.
 But if we seek the vision of that great Being within the Inner
 Sanctuary- self-gathered, tranquilly remote above all else- we begin
 by considering the images stationed at the outer precincts, or, more
 exactly to the moment, the first image that appears. How the Divine
 Mind comes into being must be explained:
 
 Everything moving has necessarily an object towards which it
 advances; but since the Supreme can have no such object, we may not
 ascribe motion to it: anything that comes into being after it can be
 produced only as a consequence of its unfailing self-intention; and,
 of course, we dare not talk of generation in time, dealing as we are
 with eternal Beings: where we speak of origin in such 
 reference, it is
 in the sense, merely, of cause and subordination: origin from the
 Supreme must not be taken to imply any movement in it: that 
 would make
 the Being resulting from the movement not a second principle but a
 third: the Movement would be the second hypostasis.
 
 Given this immobility in the Supreme, it can neither have
 yielded assent nor uttered decree nor stirred in any way towards the
 existence of a secondary.
 
 What happened then? What are we to conceive as rising in the
 neighbourhood of that immobility?
 
 It must be a circumradiation- produced from the Supreme but from
 the Supreme unaltering- and may be compared to the brilliant light
 encircling the sun and ceaselessly generated from that unchanging
 substance.
 
 All existences, as long as they retain their character, produce-
 about themselves, from their essence, in virtue of the power which
 must be in them- some necessary, outward-facing hypostasis
 continuously attached to them and representing in image the
 engendering archetypes: thus fire gives out its heat; snow 
 is cold not
 merely to itself; fragrant substances are a notable instance; for,
 as long as they last, something is diffused from them and perceived
 wherever they are present.
 
 Again, all that is fully achieved engenders: therefore the
 eternally achieved engenders eternally an eternal being. At the same
 time, the offspring is always minor: what then are we to think of
 the All-Perfect but that it can produce nothing less than the very
 greatest that is later than itself. The greatest, later than the
 divine unity, must be the Divine Mind, and it must be the second of
 all existence, for it is that which sees The One on which alone it
 leans while the First has no need whatever of it. The 
 offspring of the
 prior to Divine Mind can be no other than that Mind itself 
 and thus is
 the loftiest being in the universe, all else following upon it- the
 soul, for example, being an utterance and act of the
 Intellectual-Principle as that is an utterance and act of 
 The One. But
 in soul the utterance is obscured, for soul is an image and must
 look to its own original: that Principle, on the contrary, looks to
 the First without mediation- thus becoming what it is- and has that
 vision not as from a distance but as the immediate next with nothing
 intervening, close to the One as Soul to it.
 
 The offspring must seek and love the begetter; and especially so
 when begetter and begotten are alone in their sphere; when, in
 addition, the begetter is the highest good, the offspring
 [inevitably seeking its Good] is attached by a bond of sheer
 necessity, separated only in being distinct.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. We must be more explicit:
 
 The Intellectual-Principle stands as the image of The 
 One, firstly
 because there is a certain necessity that the first should have its
 offspring, carrying onward much of its quality, in other words that
 there be something in its likeness as the sun's rays tell of the
 sun. Yet The One is not an Intellectual-Principle; how then does it
 engender an Intellectual-Principle?
 
 Simply by the fact that in its self-quest it has vision: 
 this very
 seeing is the Intellectual-Principle. Any perception of the external
 indicates either sensation or intellection, sensation symbolized by
 a line, intellection by a circle... [corrupt passage].
 
 Of course the divisibility belonging to the circle does not
 apply to the Intellectual-Principle; all, there too, is a unity,
 though a unity which is the potentiality of all existence.
 
 The items of this potentiality the divine intellection 
 brings out,
 so to speak, from the unity and knows them in detail, as it 
 must if it
 is to be an intellectual principle.
 
 It has besides a consciousness, as it were, within itself of
 this same potentiality; it knows that it can of itself beget an
 hypostasis and can determine its own Being by the virtue emanating
 from its prior; it knows that its nature is in some sense a definite
 part of the content of that First; that it thence derives 
 its essence,
 that its strength lies there and that its Being takes perfection as
 a derivative and a recipient from the First. It sees that, 
 as a member
 of the realm of division and part, it receives life and intellection
 and all else it has and is, from the undivided and partless, since
 that First is no member of existence, but can be the source of all
 on condition only of being held down by no one distinctive shape but
 remaining the undeflected unity.
 
 [(CORRUPT)- Thus it would be the entire universe but that...]
 
 And so the First is not a thing among the things contained by
 the Intellectual-Principle though the source of all. In 
 virtue of this
 source, things of the later order are essential beings; for from
 that fact there is determination; each has its form: what has being
 cannot be envisaged as outside of limit; the nature must be held
 fast by boundary and fixity; though to the Intellectual Beings this
 fixity is no more than determination and form, the foundations of
 their substantial existence.
 
 A being of this quality, like the Intellectual-Principle, must
 be felt to be worthy of the all-pure: it could not derive from any
 other than from the first principle of all; as it comes into
 existence, all other beings must be simultaneously 
 engendered- all the
 beauty of the Ideas, all the Gods of the Intellectual realm. And it
 still remains pregnant with this offspring; for it has, so to speak,
 drawn all within itself again, holding them lest they fall away
 towards Matter to be "brought up in the House of Rhea" [in the realm
 of flux]. This is the meaning hidden in the Mysteries, and in the
 Myths of the gods: Kronos, as the wisest, exists before Zeus; he
 must absorb his offspring that, full within himself, he may 
 be also an
 Intellectual-Principle manifest in some product of his plenty;
 afterwards, the myth proceeds, Kronos engenders Zeus, who already
 exists as the [necessary and eternal] outcome of the plenty there;
 in other words the offspring of the Divine Intellect, perfect within
 itself, is Soul [the life-principle carrying forward the Ideas in
 the Divine Mind].
 
 Now, even in the Divine the engendered could not be the very
 highest; it must be a lesser, an image; it will be undetermined, as
 the Divine is, but will receive determination, and, so to speak, its
 shaping idea, from the progenitor.
 
 Yet any offspring of the Intellectual-Principle must be a
 Reason-Principle; the thought of the Divine Mind must be a 
 substantial
 existence: such then is that [Soul] which circles about the Divine
 Mind, its light, its image inseparably attached to it: on the upper
 level united with it, filled from it, enjoying it, participant in
 its nature, intellective with it, but on the lower level in contact
 with the realm beneath itself, or, rather, generating in turn an
 offspring which must lie beneath; of this lower we will treat later;
 so far we deal still with the Divine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. This is the explanation of Plato's Triplicity, in the passage
 where he names as the Primals the Beings gathered about the King of
 All, and establishes a Secondary containing the Secondaries, and a
 Third containing the Tertiaries.
 
 He teaches, also, that there is an author of the Cause, 
 that is of
 the Intellectual-Principle, which to him is the Creator who made the
 Soul, as he tells us, in the famous mixing bowl. This author of the
 causing principle, of the divine mind, is to him the Good, that
 which transcends the Intellectual-Principle and transcends Being:
 often too he uses the term "The Idea" to indicate Being and 
 the Divine
 Mind. Thus Plato knows the order of generation- from the Good, the
 Intellectual-Principle; from the Intellectual-Principle, the Soul.
 These teachings are, therefore, no novelties, no inventions of
 today, but long since stated, if not stressed; our doctrine here is
 the explanation of an earlier and can show the antiquity of these
 opinions on the testimony of Plato himself.
 
 Earlier, Parmenides made some approach to the doctrine in
 identifying Being with Intellectual-Principle while separating Real
 Being from the realm of sense.
 
 "Knowing and Being are one thing he says, and this unity 
 is to him
 motionless in spite of the intellection he attributes to it: to
 preserve its unchanging identity he excludes all bodily movement
 from it; and he compares it to a huge sphere in that it holds and
 envelops all existence and that its intellection is not an outgoing
 act but internal. Still, with all his affirmation of unity, his own
 writings lay him open to the reproach that his unity turns 
 out to be a
 multiplicity.
 
 The Platonic Parmenides is more exact; the distinction is made
 between the Primal One, a strictly pure Unity, and a secondary One
 which is a One-Many and a third which is a One-and-many; thus he too
 is in accordance with our thesis of the Three Kinds.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. Anaxagoras, again, in his assertion of a Mind pure 
 and unmixed,
 affirms a simplex First and a sundered One, though writing 
 long ago he
 failed in precision.
 
 Heraclitus, with his sense of bodily forms as things of
 ceaseless process and passage, knows the One as eternal and
 intellectual.
 
 In Empedocles, similarly, we have a dividing principle,
 "Strife," set against "Friendship"- which is The One and is to him
 bodiless, while the elements represent Matter.
 
 Later there is Aristotle; he begins by making the First
 transcendent and intellective but cancels that primacy by 
 supposing it
 to have self-intellection. Further he affirms a multitude of other
 intellective beings- as many indeed as there are orbs in the
 heavens; one such principle as in- over to every orb- and thus his
 account of the Intellectual Realm differs from Plato's and, failing
 reason, he brings in necessity; though whatever reasons he 
 had alleged
 there would always have been the objection that it would be more
 reasonable that all the spheres, as contributory to one 
 system, should
 look to a unity, to the First.
 
 We are obliged also to ask whether to Aristotle's mind all
 Intellectual Beings spring from one, and that one their First; or
 whether the Principles in the Intellectual are many.
 
 If from one, then clearly the Intellectual system will be
 analogous to that of the universe of sense-sphere encircling sphere,
 with one, the outermost, dominating all- the First [in the
 Intellectual] will envelop the entire scheme and will be an
 Intellectual [or Archetypal] Kosmos; and as in our universe the
 spheres are not empty but the first sphere is thick with stars and
 none without them, so, in the Intellectual Kosmos, those 
 principles of
 Movement will envelop a multitude of Beings, and that world will be
 the realm of the greater reality.
 
 If on the contrary each is a principle, then the effective
 powers become a matter of chance; under what compulsion are they to
 hold together and act with one mind towards that work of unity, the
 harmony of the entire heavenly system? Again what can make it
 necessary that the material bodies of the heavenly system be equal
 in number to the Intellectual moving principles, and how can these
 incorporeal Beings be numerically many when there is no Matter to
 serve as the basis of difference?
 
 For these reasons the ancient philosophers that ranged
 themselves most closely to the school of Pythagoras and of his later
 followers and to that of Pherekudes, have insisted upon this Nature,
 some developing the subject in their writings while others treated
 of it merely in unwritten discourses, some no doubt ignoring it
 entirely.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. We have shown the inevitability of certain convictions as to
 the scheme of things:
 
 There exists a Principle which transcends Being; this is The
 One, whose nature we have sought to establish in so far as such
 matters lend themselves to proof. Upon The One follows 
 immediately the
 Principle which is at once Being and the 
 Intellectual-Principle. Third
 comes the Principle, Soul.
 
 Now just as these three exist for the system of Nature, so, we
 must hold, they exist for ourselves. I am not speaking of 
 the material
 order- all that is separable- but of what lies beyond the sense realm
 in the same way as the Primals are beyond all the heavens; I mean the
 corresponding aspect of man, what Plato calls the Interior Man.
 
 Thus our soul, too, is a divine thing, belonging to another
 order than sense; such is all that holds the rank of soul, but
 [above the life-principle] there is the soul perfected as containing
 Intellectual-Principle with its double phase, reasoning and 
 giving the
 power to reason. The reasoning phase of the soul, needing no bodily
 organ for its thinking but maintaining, in purity, its 
 distinctive Act
 that its thought may be uncontaminated- this we cannot err 
 in placing,
 separate and not mingled into body, within the first Intellectual.
 We may not seek any point of space in which to seat it; it 
 must be set
 outside of all space: its distinct quality, its separateness, its
 immateriality, demand that it be a thing alone, untouched by all of
 the bodily order. This is why we read of the universe that the
 Demiurge cast the soul around it from without- understand that phase
 of soul which is permanently seated in the Intellectual- and of
 ourselves that the charioteer's head reaches upwards towards the
 heights.
 
 The admonition to sever soul from body is not, of course, to be
 understood spatially- that separation stands made in Nature- the
 reference is to holding our rank, to use of our thinking, to an
 attitude of alienation from the body in the effort to lead up and
 attach to the over-world, equally with the other, that phase of soul
 seated here and, alone, having to do with body, creating, moulding,
 spending its care upon it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. Since there is a Soul which reasons upon the right and good-
 for reasoning is an enquiry into the rightness and goodness of this
 rather than that- there must exist some permanent Right, the source
 and foundation of this reasoning in our soul; how, else, could any
 such discussion be held? Further, since the soul's attention to
 these matters is intermittent, there must be within us an
 Intellectual-Principle acquainted with that Right not by 
 momentary act
 but in permanent possession. Similarly there must be also the
 principle of this principle, its cause, God. This Highest cannot be
 divided and allotted, must remain intangible but not bound to space,
 it may be present at many points, wheresoever there is anything
 capable of accepting one of its manifestations; thus a centre is an
 independent unity; everything within the circle has its term at the
 centre; and to the centre the radii bring each their own. Within our
 nature is such a centre by which we grasp and are linked and 
 held; and
 those of us are firmly in the Supreme whose collective tendency is
 There.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. Possessed of such powers, how does it happen that we do not
 lay hold of them, but for the most part, let these high activities
 go idle- some, even, of us never bringing them in any degree to
 effect?
 
 The answer is that all the Divine Beings are unceasingly about
 their own act, the Intellectual-Principle and its Prior always
 self-intent; and so, too, the soul maintains its unfailing movement;
 for not all that passes in the soul is, by that fact, perceptible;
 we know just as much as impinges upon the faculty of sense. Any
 activity not transmitted to the sensitive faculty has not traversed
 the entire soul: we remain unaware because the human being includes
 sense-perception; man is not merely a part [the higher part] of the
 soul but the total.
 
 None the less every being of the order of soul is in continuous
 activity as long as life holds, continuously executing to itself its
 characteristic act: knowledge of the act depends upon 
 transmission and
 perception. If there is to be perception of what is thus present, we
 must turn the perceptive faculty inward and hold it to attention
 there. Hoping to hear a desired voice, we let all others pass and
 are alert for the coming at last of that most welcome of sounds: so
 here, we must let the hearings of sense go by, save for sheer
 necessity, and keep the soul's perception bright and quick to the
 sounds from above.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SECOND TRACTATE.
 
 
 THE ORIGIN AND ORDER OF THE BEINGS.
 
 FOLLOWING ON THE FIRST.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. The One is all things and no one of them; the source of all
 things is not all things; all things are its possession- 
 running back,
 so to speak, to it- or, more correctly, not yet so, they will be.
 
 But a universe from an unbroken unity, in which there appears no
 diversity, not even duality?
 
 It is precisely because that is nothing within the One that all
 things are from it: in order that Being may be brought about, the
 source must be no Being but Being's generator, in what is to be
 thought of as the primal act of generation. Seeking nothing,
 possessing nothing, lacking nothing, the One is perfect and, in our
 metaphor, has overflowed, and its exuberance has produced the new:
 this product has turned again to its begetter and been filled and
 has become its contemplator and so an Intellectual-Principle.
 
 That station towards the one [the fact that something exists in
 presence of the One] establishes Being; that vision directed upon
 the One establishes the Intellectual-Principle; standing towards the
 One to the end of vision, it is simultaneously
 Intellectual-Principle and Being; and, attaining resemblance 
 in virtue
 of this vision, it repeats the act of the One in pouring forth a
 vast power.
 
 This second outflow is a Form or Idea representing the Divine
 Intellect as the Divine Intellect represented its own prior, The One.
 
 This active power sprung from essence [from the
 Intellectual-Principle considered as Being] is Soul.
 
 Soul arises as the idea and act of the motionless
 Intellectual-Principle- which itself sprang from its own motionless
 prior- but the soul's operation is not similarly motionless; 
 its image
 is generated from its movement. It takes fulness by looking to its
 source; but it generates its image by adopting another, a downward,
 movement.
 
 This image of Soul is Sense and Nature, the vegetal principle.
 
 Nothing, however, is completely severed from its prior. Thus the
 human Soul appears to reach away as far down as to the vegetal
 order: in some sense it does, since the life of growing things is
 within its province; but it is not present entire; when it 
 has reached
 the vegetal order it is there in the sense that having moved thus
 far downwards it produces- by its outgoing and its tendency towards
 the less good- another hypostasis or form of being just as its prior
 (the loftier phase of the Soul) is produced from the
 Intellectual-Principle which yet remains in untroubled
 self-possession.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. To resume: there is from the first principle to ultimate an
 outgoing in which unfailingly each principle retains its own seat
 while its offshoot takes another rank, a lower, though on the other
 hand every being is in identity with its prior as long as it holds
 that contact.
 
 In the case of soul entering some vegetal form, what is there is
 one phase, the more rebellious and less intellectual, outgone to
 that extreme; in a soul entering an animal, the faculty of sensation
 has been dominant and brought it there; in soul entering man, the
 movement outward has either been wholly of its reasoning part or has
 come from the Intellectual-Principle in the sense that the soul,
 possessing that principle as immanent to its being, has an inborn
 desire of intellectual activity and of movement in general.
 
 But, looking more minutely into the matter, when shoots 
 or topmost
 boughs are lopped from some growing thing, where goes the soul that
 was present in them? Simply, whence it came: soul never knew spatial
 separation and therefore is always within the source. If you cut the
 root to pieces, or burn it, where is the life that was present
 there? In the soul, which never went outside of itself.
 
 No doubt, despite this permanence, the soul must have been in
 something if it reascends; and if it does not, it is still somewhere;
 it is in some other vegetal soul: but all this means merely 
 that it is
 not crushed into some one spot; if a Soul-power reascends, it is
 within the Soul-power preceding it; that in turn can be only in the
 soul-power prior again, the phase reaching upwards to the
 Intellectual-Principle. Of course nothing here must be understood
 spatially: Soul never was in space; and the Divine Intellect, again,
 is distinguished from soul as being still more free.
 
 Soul thus is nowhere but in the Principle which has that
 characteristic existence at once nowhere and everywhere.
 
 If the soul on its upward path has halted midway before wholly
 achieving the supreme heights, it has a mid-rank life and has
 centred itself upon the mid-phase of its being. All in that 
 mid-region
 is Intellectual-Principle not wholly itself- nothing else because
 deriving thence [and therefore of that name and rank], yet not that
 because the Intellectual-Principle in giving it forth is not merged
 into it.
 
 There exists, thus, a life, as it were, of huge 
 extension, a total
 in which each several part differs from its next, all making a
 self-continuous whole under a law of discrimination by which the
 various forms of things arise with no effacement of any prior in its
 secondary.
 
 But does this Soul-phase in the vegetal order, produce nothing?
 
 It engenders precisely the Kind in which it is thus present:
 how, is a question to be handled from another starting-point.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THIRD TRACTATE.
 
 
 THE KNOWING HYPOSTASES AND THE
 
 TRANSCENDENT.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Are we to think that a being knowing itself must contain
 diversity, that self-knowledge can be affirmed only when some one
 phase of the self perceives other phases, and that therefore an
 absolutely simplex entity would be equally incapable of introversion
 and of self-awareness?
 
 No: a being that has no parts or phases may have this
 consciousness; in fact there would be no real self-knowing in an
 entity presented as knowing itself in virtue of being a 
 compound- some
 single element in it perceiving other elements- as we may 
 know our own
 form and entire bodily organism by sense-perception: such 
 knowing does
 not cover the whole field; the knowing element has not had the
 required cognisance at once of its associates and of itself; this is
 not the self-knower asked for; it is merely something that knows
 something else.
 
 Either we must exhibit the self-knowing of an uncompounded
 being- and show how that is possible- or abandon the belief that any
 being can possess veritable self-cognition.
 
 To abandon the belief is not possible in view of the many
 absurdities thus entailed.
 
 It would be already absurd enough to deny this power to the soul
 or mind, but the very height of absurdity to deny it to the nature
 of the Intellectual-Principle, presented thus as knowing the rest of
 things but not attaining to knowledge, or even awareness, of itself.
 
 It is the province of sense and in some degree of understanding
 and judgement, but not of the Intellectual-Principle, to handle the
 external, though whether the Intellectual-Principle holds the
 knowledge of these things is a question to be examined, but it is
 obvious that the Intellectual-Principle must have knowledge of the
 Intellectual objects. Now, can it know those objects alone or must
 it not simultaneously know itself, the being whose function it is to
 know just those things? Can it have self-knowledge in the sense
 [dismissed above as inadequate] of knowing its content while it
 ignores itself? Can it be aware of knowing its members and yet
 remain in ignorance of its own knowing self? Self and content must
 be simultaneously present: the method and degree of this knowledge
 we must now consider.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. We begin with the soul, asking whether it is to be allowed
 self-knowledge and what the knowing principle in it would be and how
 operating.
 
 The sense-principle in it we may at once decide, takes
 cognisance only of the external; even in any awareness of events
 within the body it occupies, this is still the perception of 
 something
 external to a principle dealing with those bodily conditions not as
 within but as beneath itself.
 
 The reasoning-principle in the Soul acts upon the
 representations standing before it as the result of
 sense-perception; these it judges, combining, distinguishing: or it
 may also observe the impressions, so to speak, rising from the
 Intellectual-Principle, and has the same power of handling these;
 and reasoning will develop to wisdom where it recognizes the new and
 late-coming impressions [those of sense] and adapts them, so 
 to speak,
 to those it holds from long before- the act which may be described
 as the soul's Reminiscence.
 
 So far as this, the efficacy of the Intellectual-Principle in
 the Soul certainly reaches; but is there also introversion and
 self-cognition or is that power to be reserved strictly for 
 the Divine
 Mind?
 
 If we accord self-knowing to this phase of the soul we make it
 an Intellectual-Principle and will have to show what distinguishes
 it from its prior; if we refuse it self-knowing, all our thought
 brings us step by step to some principle which has this power, and
 we must discover what such self-knowing consists in. If, again, we
 do allow self-knowledge in the lower we must examine the question of
 degree; for if there is no difference of degree, then the reasoning
 principle in soul is the Intellectual-Principle unalloyed.
 
 We ask, then, whether the understanding principle in the soul
 has equally the power of turning inwards upon itself or 
 whether it has
 no more than that of comprehending the impressions, superior and
 inferior, which it receives.
 
 The first stage is to discover what this comprehension is.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Sense sees a man and transmits the impression to the
 understanding. What does the understanding say? It has nothing to
 say as yet; it accepts and waits; unless, rather, it questions
 within itself "Who is this?"- someone it has met before- and then,
 drawing on memory, says, "Socrates."
 
 If it should go on to develop the impression received, it
 distinguishes various elements in what the representative faculty
 has set before it; supposing it to say "Socrates, if the man 
 is good,"
 then, while it has spoken upon information from the senses, its
 total pronouncement is its own; it contains within itself a standard
 of good.
 
 But how does it thus contain the good within itself?
 
 It is, itself, of the nature of the good and it has been
 strengthened still towards the perception of all that is good by the
 irradiation of the Intellectual-Principle upon it; for this 
 pure phase
 of the soul welcomes to itself the images implanted from its prior.
 
 But why may we not distinguish this understanding phase as
 Intellectual-Principle and take soul to consist of the later phases
 from the sensitive downwards?
 
 Because all the activities mentioned are within the scope of a
 reasoning faculty, and reasoning is characteristically the 
 function of
 soul.
 
 Why not, however, absolve the question by assigning
 self-cognisance to this phase?
 
 Because we have allotted to soul the function of dealing- in
 thought and in multiform action- with the external, and we hold that
 observation of self and of the content of self must belong to
 Intellectual-Principle.
 
 If any one says, "Still; what precludes the reasoning soul from
 observing its own content by some special faculty?" he is no longer
 posting a principle of understanding or of reasoning but, simply,
 bringing in the Intellectual-Principle unalloyed.
 
 But what precludes the Intellectual-Principle from being
 present, unalloyed, within the soul? Nothing, we admit; but are we
 entitled therefore to think of it as a phase of soul?
 
 We cannot describe it as belonging to the soul though we do
 describe it as our Intellectual-Principle, something 
 distinct from the
 understanding, advanced above it, and yet ours even though we cannot
 include it among soul-phases: it is ours and not ours; and therefore
 we use it sometimes and sometimes not, whereas we always have use of
 the understanding; the Intellectual-Principle is ours when we act by
 it, not ours when we neglect it.
 
 But what is this acting by it? Does it mean that we become the
 Intellectual-Principle so that our utterance is the utterance of the
 Intellectual-Principle, or that we represent it?
 
 We are not the Intellectual-Principle; we represent it in virtue
 of that highest reasoning faculty which draws upon it.
 
 Still; we perceive by means of the perceptive faculty and are,
 ourselves, the percipients: may we not say the same of the
 intellective act?
 
 No: our reasoning is our own; we ourselves think the 
 thoughts that
 occupy the understanding- for this is actually the We- but the
 operation of the Intellectual-Principle enters from above us as that
 of the sensitive faculty from below; the We is the soul at its
 highest, the mid-point between two powers, between the sensitive
 principle, inferior to us, and the intellectual principle 
 superior. We
 think of the perceptive act as integral to ourselves because our
 sense-perception is uninterrupted; we hesitate as to the
 Intellectual-Principle both because we are not always 
 occupied with it
 and because it exists apart, not a principle inclining to us but one
 to which we incline when we choose to look upwards.
 
 The sensitive principle is our scout; the Intellectual-Principle
 our King.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. But we, too, are king when we are moulded to the
 Intellectual-Principle.
 
 That correspondence may be brought about in two ways: either the
 radii from that centre are traced upon us to be our law or we are
 filled full of the Divine Mind, which again may have become to us a
 thing seen and felt as a presence.
 
 Hence our self-knowing comes to the knowing of all the 
 rest of our
 being in virtue of this thing patently present; or by that power
 itself communicating to us its own power of self-knowing; or by our
 becoming identical with that principle of knowledge.
 
 Thus the self-knower is a double person: there is the one that
 takes cognisance of the principle in virtue of which understanding
 occurs in the soul or mind; and there is the higher, knowing himself
 by the Intellectual-Principle with which he becomes identical: this
 latter knows the self as no longer man but as a being that has
 become something other through and through: he has thrown himself as
 one thing over into the superior order, taking with him only that
 better part of the soul which alone is winged for the 
 Intellectual Act
 and gives the man, once established There, the power to appropriate
 what he has seen.
 
 We can scarcely suppose this understanding faculty to be unaware
 that it has understanding; that it takes cognisance of things
 external; that in its judgements it decides by the rules and 
 standards
 within itself held directly from the Intellectual-Principle; that
 there is something higher than itself, something which, moreover, it
 has no need to seek but fully possesses. What can we conceive to
 escape the self-knowledge of a principle which admittedly knows the
 place it holds and the work it has to do? It affirms that it springs
 from Intellectual-Principle whose second and image it is, that it
 holds all within itself, the universe of things, engraved, so to
 say, upon it as all is held There by the eternal engraver. Aware so
 far of itself, can it be supposed to halt at that? Are we to suppose
 that all we can do is to apply a distinct power of our 
 nature and come
 thus to awareness of that Intellectual-Principle as aware of itself?
 Or may we not appropriate that principle- which belongs to 
 us as we to
 it- and thus attain to awareness, at once, of it and of ourselves?
 Yes: this is the necessary way if we are to experience the
 self-knowledge vested in the Intellectual-Principle. And a 
 man becomes
 Intellectual-Principle when, ignoring all other phases of his being,
 he sees through that only and sees only that and so knows himself by
 means of the self- in other words attains the self-knowledge 
 which the
 Intellectual-Principle possesses.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. Does it all come down, then, to one phase of the self knowing
 another phase?
 
 That would be a case of knower distinguished from known, 
 and would
 not be self-knowing.
 
 What, then, if the total combination were supposed to be of one
 piece, knower quite undistinguished from known, so that, seeing any
 given part of itself as identical with itself, it sees 
 itself by means
 of itself, knower and known thus being entirely without
 differentiation?
 
 To begin with, the distinction in one self thus suggested is a
 strange phenomenon. How is the self to make the partition? The thing
 cannot happen of itself. And, again, which phase makes it? The phase
 that decides to be the knower or that which is to be the known? Then
 how can the knowing phase know itself in the known when it has
 chosen to be the knower and put itself apart from the known? In such
 self-knowledge by sundering it can be aware only of the 
 object, not of
 the agent; it will not know its entire content, or itself as an
 integral whole; it knows the phase seen but not the seeing phase and
 thus has knowledge of something else, not self-knowledge.
 
 In order to perfect self-knowing it must bring over from itself
 the knowing phase as well: seeing subject and seen objects must be
 present as one thing. Now if in this coalescence of seeing subject
 with seen objects, the objects were merely representations of the
 reality, the subject would not possess the realities: if it is to
 possess them it must do so not by seeing them as the result of any
 self-division but by knowing them, containing them, before any
 self-division occurs.
 
 At that, the object known must be identical with the knowing act
 [or agent], the Intellectual-Principle, therefore, identical with
 the Intellectual Realm. And in fact, if this identity does not
 exist, neither does truth; the Principle that should contain 
 realities
 is found to contain a transcript, something different from the
 realities; that constitutes non-Truth; Truth cannot apply to 
 something
 conflicting with itself; what it affirms it must also be.
 
 Thus we find that the Intellectual-Principle, the Intellectual
 Realm and Real Being constitute one thing, which is the Primal
 Being; the primal Intellectual-Principle is that which contains the
 realities or, rather, which is identical with them.
 
 But taking Primal Intellection and its intellectual 
 object to be a
 unity, how does that give an Intellective Being knowing itself? An
 intellection enveloping its object or identical with it is far from
 exhibiting the Intellectual-Principle as self-knowing.
 
 All turns on the identity. The intellectual object is itself an
 activity, not a mere potentiality; it is not lifeless; nor are the
 life and intellection brought into it as into something naturally
 devoid of them, some stone or other dead matter; no, the
 intellectual object is essentially existent, the primal 
 reality. As an
 active force, the first activity, it must be, also itself, 
 the noblest
 intellection, intellection possessing real being since it is
 entirely true; and such an intellection, primal and primally 
 existent,
 can be no other than the primal principle of Intellection: for that
 primal principle is no potentiality and cannot be an agent distinct
 from its act and thus, once more, possessing its essential being as
 a mere potentiality. As an act- and one whose very being is 
 an act- it
 must be undistinguishably identical with its act: but Being and the
 Intellectual object are also identical with that act; therefore the
 Intellectual-Principle, its exercise of intellection and the 
 object of
 intellection all are identical. Given its intellection identical
 with intellectual object and the object identical with the Principle
 itself, it cannot but have self-knowledge: its intellection operates
 by the intellectual act which is itself upon the intellectual object
 which similarly is itself. It possesses self-knowing, thus, on every
 count; the act is itself; and the object seen in that act- self, is
 itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. Thus we have shown that there exists that which in the
 strictest sense possesses self-knowing.
 
 This self-knowing agent, perfect in the 
 Intellectual-Principle, is
 modified in the Soul.
 
 The difference is that, while the soul knows itself as within
 something else, the Intellectual-Principle knows itself as
 self-depending, knows all its nature and character, and 
 knows by right
 of its own being and by simple introversion. When it looks upon the
 authentic existences it is looking upon itself; its vision as its
 effective existence, and this efficacy is itself since the
 Intellectual-Principle and the Intellectual Act are one: this is an
 integral seeing itself by its entire being, not a part seeing by a
 part.
 
 But has our discussion issued in an Intellectual-Principle
 having a persuasive activity [furnishing us with probability]?
 
 No: it brings compulsion not persuasion; compulsion 
 belongs to the
 Intellectual-Principle, persuasion to the soul or mind, and 
 we seem to
 desire to be persuaded rather than to see the truth in the pure
 intellect.
 
 As long as we were Above, collected within the Intellectual
 nature, we were satisfied; we were held in the intellectual act; we
 had vision because we drew all into unity- for the thinker in us was
 the Intellectual-Principle telling us of itself- and the soul or
 mind was motionless, assenting to that act of its prior. But now
 that we are once more here- living in the secondary, the 
 soul- we seek
 for persuasive probabilities: it is through the image we desire to
 know the archetype.
 
 Our way is to teach our soul how the Intellectual-Principle
 exercises self-vision; the phase thus to be taught is that which
 already touches the intellective order, that which we call the
 understanding or intelligent soul, indicating by the very 
 name that it
 is already of itself in some degree an Intellectual-Principle or
 that it holds its peculiar power through and from that 
 Principle. This
 phase must be brought to understand by what means it has knowledge
 of the thing it sees and warrant for what it affirms: if it became
 what it affirms, it would by that fact possess self-knowing. All its
 vision and affirmation being in the Supreme or deriving from 
 it- There
 where itself also is- it will possess self-knowledge by its 
 right as a
 Reason-Principle, claiming its kin and bringing all into accord with
 the divine imprint upon it.
 
 The soul therefore [to attain self-knowledge] has only 
 to set this
 image [that is to say, its highest phase] alongside the veritable
 Intellectual-Principle which we have found to be identical with the
 truths constituting the objects of intellection, the world of
 Primals and Reality: for this Intellectual-Principle, by very
 definition, cannot be outside of itself, the Intellectual Reality:
 self-gathered and unalloyed, it is Intellectual-Principle through
 all the range of its being- for unintelligent intelligence is not
 possible- and thus it possesses of necessity self-knowing, as a
 being immanent to itself and one having for function and 
 essence to be
 purely and solely Intellectual-Principle. This is no doer; the doer,
 not self-intent but looking outward, will have knowledge, in some
 kind, of the external, but, if wholly of this practical order, need
 have no self-knowledge; where, on the contrary, there is no action-
 and of course the pure Intellectual-Principle cannot be straining
 after any absent good- the intention can be only towards the self;
 at once self-knowing becomes not merely plausible but 
 inevitable; what
 else could living signify in a being immune from action and existing
 in Intellect?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. The contemplating of God, we might answer.
 
 But to admit its knowing God is to be compelled to admit its
 self-knowing. It will know what it holds from God, what God has
 given forth or may; with this knowledge, it knows itself at the
 stroke, for it is itself one of those given things- in fact is all
 of them. Knowing God and His power, then, it knows itself, since it
 comes from Him and carries His power upon it; if, because 
 here the act
 of vision is identical with the object, it is unable to see God
 clearly, then all the more, by the equation of seeing and 
 seen, we are
 driven back upon that self-seeing and self-knowing in which 
 seeing and
 thing seen are undistinguishably one thing.
 
 And what else is there to attribute to it?
 
 Repose, no doubt; but, to an Intellectual-Principle, 
 Repose is not
 an abdication from intellect; its Repose is an Act, the act of
 abstention from the alien: in all forms of existence repose from the
 alien leaves the characteristic activity intact, especially where
 the Being is not merely potential but fully realized.
 
 In the Intellectual-Principle, the Being is an Act and in the
 absence of any other object it must be self-directed; by this
 self-intellection it holds its Act within itself and upon itself;
 all that can emanate from it is produced by this self-centering and
 self-intention; first- self-gathered, it then gives itself or gives
 something in its likeness; fire must first be self-centred and be
 fire, true to fire's natural Act; then it may reproduce itself
 elsewhere.
 
 Once more, then; the Intellectual-Principle is a self-intent
 activity, but soul has the double phase, one inner, intent upon the
 Intellectual-Principle, the other outside it and facing to the
 external; by the one it holds the likeness to its source; by the
 other, even in its unlikeness, it still comes to likeness in this
 sphere, too, by virtue of action and production; in its action it
 still contemplates, and its production produces Ideal-forms- divine
 intellections perfectly wrought out- so that all its creations are
 representations of the divine Intellection and of the divine
 Intellect, moulded upon the archetype, of which all are 
 emanations and
 images, the nearer more true, the very latest preserving some faint
 likeness of the source.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. Now comes the question what sort of thing does the
 Intellectual-Principle see in seeing the Intellectual Realm and what
 in seeing itself?
 
 We are not to look for an Intellectual realm reminding us of the
 colour or shape to be seen on material objects: the intellectual
 antedates all such things; and even in our sphere the production is
 very different from the Reason-Principle in the seeds from 
 which it is
 produced. The seed principles are invisible and the beings of the
 Intellectual still more characteristically so; the Intellectuals are
 of one same nature with the Intellectual Realm which contains them,
 just as the Reason-Principle in the seed is identical with the soul,
 or life-principle, containing it.
 
 But the Soul (considered as apart from the 
 Intellectual-Principle)
 has no vision of what it thus contains, for it is not the producer
 but, like the Reason-Principles also, an image of its source: that
 source is the brilliant, the authentic, the primarily existent, the
 thing self-sprung and self-intent; but its image, soul, is a thing
 which can have no permanence except by attachment, by living in that
 other; the very nature of an image is that, as a secondary, it shall
 have its being in something else, if at all it exist apart from its
 original. Hence this image (soul) has not vision, for it has not the
 necessary light, and, if it should see, then, as finding its
 completion elsewhere, it sees another, not itself.
 
 In the pure Intellectual there is nothing of this: the vision
 and the envisioned are a unity; the seen is as the seeing and seeing
 as seen.
 
 What, then, is there that can pronounce upon the nature of this
 all-unity?
 
 That which sees: and to see is the function of the
 Intellectual-Principle. Even in our own sphere [we have a parallel
 to this self-vision of a unity], our vision is light or 
 rather becomes
 one with light, and it sees light for it sees colours. In the
 intellectual, the vision sees not through some medium but by and
 through itself alone, for its object is not external: by one light
 it sees another not through any intermediate agency; a light sees a
 light, that is to say a thing sees itself. This light shining within
 the soul enlightens it; that is, it makes the soul intellective,
 working it into likeness with itself, the light above.
 
 Think of the traces of this light upon the soul, then say to
 yourself that such, and more beautiful and broader and more radiant,
 is the light itself; thus you will approach to the nature of the
 Intellectual-Principle and the Intellectual Realm, for it is this
 light, itself lit from above, which gives the soul its brighter life.
 
 It is not the source of the generative life of the soul which,
 on the contrary, it draws inward, preserving it from such diffusion,
 holding it to the love of the splendour of its Prior.
 
 Nor does it give the life of perception and sensation, for that
 looks to the external and to what acts most vigorously upon 
 the senses
 whereas one accepting that light of truth may be said no 
 longer to see
 the visible, but the very contrary.
 
 This means in sum that the life the soul takes thence is an
 intellective life, a trace of the life in the [divine] Intellect, in
 which alone the authentic exists.
 
 The life in the Divine Intellect is also an Act: it is the
 primal light outlamping to itself primarily, its own torch;
 light-giver and lit at once; the authentic intellectual object,
 knowing at once and known, seen to itself and needing no other than
 itself to see by, self-sufficing to the vision, since what it sees
 it is; known to us by that very same light, our knowledge of it
 attained through itself, for from nowhere else could we find 
 the means
 of telling of it. By its nature, its self-vision is the clearer but,
 using it as our medium, we too may come to see by it.
 
 In the strength of such considerations we lead up our own soul
 to the Divine, so that it poses itself as an image of that Being,
 its life becoming an imprint and a likeness of the Highest, its
 every act of thought making it over into the Divine and the
 Intellectual.
 
 If the soul is questioned as to the nature of that
 Intellectual-Principle- the perfect and all-embracing, the primal
 self-knower- it has but to enter into that Principle, or to sink all
 its activity into that, and at once it shows itself to be in 
 effective
 possession of those priors whose memory it never lost: thus, as an
 image of the Intellectual-Principle, it can make itself the medium
 by which to attain some vision of it; it draws upon that 
 within itself
 which is most closely resemblant, as far as resemblance is possible
 between divine Intellect and any phase of soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. In order, then, to know what the Divine Mind is, we must
 observe soul and especially its most God-like phase.
 
 One certain way to this knowledge is to separate first, the man
 from the body- yourself, that is, from your body- next to put aside
 that soul which moulded the body, and, very earnestly, the system of
 sense with desires and impulses and every such futility, all setting
 definitely towards the mortal: what is left is the phase of the soul
 which we have declared to be an image of the Divine Intellect,
 retaining some light from that sun, while it pours downward upon the
 sphere of magnitudes [that is, of Matter] the light playing about
 itself which is generated from its own nature.
 
 Of course we do not pretend that the sun's light [as the analogy
 might imply] remains a self-gathered and sun-centred thing: it is at
 once outrushing and indwelling; it strikes outward continuously, lap
 after lap, until it reaches us upon our earth: we must take it that
 all the light, including that which plays about the sun's orb, has
 travelled; otherwise we would have a void expanse, that of the
 space- which is material- next to the sun's orb. The Soul, on the
 contrary- a light springing from the Divine Mind and shining 
 about it-
 is in closest touch with that source; it is not in transit 
 but remains
 centred there, and, in likeness to that principle, it has no place:
 the light of the sun is actually in the air, but the soul is clean
 of all such contact so that its immunity is patent to itself and to
 any other of the same order.
 
 And by its own characteristic act, though not without reasoning
 process, it knows the nature of the Intellectual-Principle which, on
 its side, knows itself without need of reasoning, for it is ever
 self-present whereas we become so by directing our soul towards it;
 our life is broken and there are many lives, but that principle
 needs no changings of life or of things; the lives it brings to
 being are for others not for itself: it cannot need the inferior;
 nor does it for itself produce the less when it possesses or is the
 all, nor the images when it possesses or is the prototype.
 
 Anyone not of the strength to lay hold of the first soul, that
 possessing pure intellection, must grasp that which has to 
 do with our
 ordinary thinking and thence ascend: if even this prove too hard,
 let him turn to account the sensitive phase which carries the ideal
 forms of the less fine degree, that phase which, too, with 
 its powers,
 is immaterial and lies just within the realm of Ideal-principles.
 
 One may even, if it seem necessary, begin as low as the
 reproductive soul and its very production and thence make the
 ascent, mounting from those ultimate ideal principles to the 
 ultimates
 in the higher sense, that is to the primals.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. This matter need not be elaborated at present: it suffices
 to say that if the created were all, these ultimates [the 
 higher] need
 not exist: but the Supreme does include primals, the primals because
 the producers. In other words, there must be, with the made, the
 making source; and, unless these are to be identical, there will be
 need of some link between them. Similarly, this link which is the
 Intellectual-Principle demands yet a Transcendent. If we are 
 asked why
 this Transcendent also should not have self-vision, our 
 answer is that
 it has no need of vision; but this we will discuss later: for the
 moment we go back, since the question at issue is gravely important.
 
 We repeat that the Intellectual-Principle must have, 
 actually has,
 self-vision, firstly because it has multiplicity, next because it
 exists for the external and therefore must be a seeing power, one
 seeing that external; in fact its very essence is vision. Given some
 external, there must be vision; and if there be nothing external the
 Intellectual-Principle [Divine Mind] exists in vain. Unless there is
 something beyond bare unity, there can be no vision: vision must
 converge with a visible object. And this which the seer is to see
 can be only a multiple, no undistinguishable unity; nor could a
 universal unity find anything upon which to exercise any 
 act; all, one
 and desolate, would be utter stagnation; in so far as there 
 is action,
 there is diversity. If there be no distinctions, what is there to
 do, what direction in which to move? An agent must either 
 act upon the
 extern or be a multiple and so able to act upon itself: making no
 advance towards anything other than itself, it is motionless 
 and where
 it could know only blank fixity it can know nothing.
 
 The intellective power, therefore, when occupied with the
 intellectual act, must be in a state of duality, whether one of the
 two elements stand actually outside or both lie within: the
 intellectual act will always comport diversity as well as the
 necessary identity, and in the same way its characteristic objects
 [the Ideas] must stand to the Intellectual-Principle as at once
 distinct and identical. This applies equally to the single object;
 there can be no intellection except of something containing
 separable detail and, since the object is a Reason-principle [a
 discriminated Idea] it has the necessary element of multiplicity.
 The Intellectual-Principle, thus, is informed of itself by 
 the fact of
 being a multiple organ of vision, an eye receptive of many 
 illuminated
 objects. If it had to direct itself to a memberless unity, 
 it would be
 dereasoned: what could it say or know of such an object? The
 self-affirmation of [even] a memberless unity implies the
 repudiation of all that does not enter into the character: in other
 words, it must be multiple as a preliminary to being itself.
 
 Then, again, in the assertion "I am this particular 
 thing," either
 the "particular thing" is distinct from the assertor- and there is a
 false statement- or it is included within it, and, at once,
 multiplicity is asserted: otherwise the assertion is "I am 
 what I am,"
 or "I am I."
 
 If it be no more than a simple duality able to say "I and that
 other phase," there is already multiplicity, for there is
 distinction and ground of distinction, there is number with all its
 train of separate things.
 
 In sum, then, a knowing principle must handle distinct items:
 its object must, at the moment of cognition, contain diversity;
 otherwise the thing remains unknown; there is mere 
 conjunction, such a
 contact, without affirmation or comprehension, as would precede
 knowledge, the intellect not yet in being, the impinging agent not
 percipient.
 
 Similarly the knowing principle itself cannot remain simplex,
 especially in the act of self-knowing: all silent though its
 self-perception be, it is dual to itself. Of course it has no need
 of minute self-handling since it has nothing to learn by its
 intellective act; before it is [effectively] Intellect, it holds
 knowledge of its own content. Knowledge implies desire, for it is,
 so to speak, discovery crowning a search; the utterly 
 undifferentiated
 remains self-centred and makes no enquiry about that self: anything
 capable of analysing its content, must be a manifold.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. Thus the Intellectual-Principle, in the act of knowing the
 Transcendent, is a manifold. It knows the Transcendent in 
 very essence
 but, with all its effort to grasp that prior as a pure unity, it
 goes forth amassing successive impressions, so that, to it, 
 the object
 becomes multiple: thus in its outgoing to its object it is not
 [fully realised] Intellectual-Principle; it is an eye that 
 has not yet
 seen; in its return it is an eye possessed of the multiplicity which
 it has itself conferred: it sought something of which it found the
 vague presentment within itself; it returned with something else,
 the manifold quality with which it has of its own act invested the
 simplex.
 
 If it had not possessed a previous impression of the 
 Transcendent,
 it could never have grasped it, but this impression, originally of
 unity, becomes an impression of multiplicity; and the
 Intellectual-Principle, in taking cognisance of that multiplicity,
 knows the Transcendent and so is realized as an eye possessed of its
 vision.
 
 It is now Intellectual-Principle since it actually holds its
 object, and holds it by the act of intellection: before, it was no
 more than a tendance, an eye blank of impression: it was in motion
 towards the transcendental; now that it has attained, it has become
 Intellectual-Principle henceforth absorbed; in virtue of this
 intellection it holds the character of Intellectual-Principle, of
 Essential Existence and of Intellectual Act where, previously, not
 possessing the Intellectual Object, it was not Intellectual
 Perception, and, not yet having exercised the Intellectual 
 Act, it was
 not Intellectual-Principle.
 
 The Principle before all these principles is no doubt the first
 principle of the universe, but not as immanent: immanence is not for
 primal sources but for engendering secondaries; that which stands as
 primal source of everything is not a thing but is distinct from all
 things: it is not, then, a member of the total but earlier than all,
 earlier, thus, than the Intellectual-Principle- which in 
 fact envelops
 the entire train of things.
 
 Thus we come, once more, to a Being above the
 Intellectual-Principle and, since the sequent amounts to no less
 than the All, we recognise, again, a Being above the All. This
 assuredly cannot be one of the things to which it is prior. 
 We may not
 call it "Intellect"; therefore, too, we may not call it "the 
 Good," if
 "the Good" is to be taken in the sense of some one member of the
 universe; if we mean that which precedes the universe of things, the
 name may be allowed.
 
 The Intellectual-Principle is established in multiplicity; its
 intellection, self-sprung though it be, is in the nature of
 something added to it [some accidental dualism] and makes it 
 multiple:
 the utterly simplex, and therefore first of all beings, must, then,
 transcend the Intellectual-Principle; and, obviously, if this had
 intellection it would no longer transcend the Intellectual-Principle
 but be it, and at once be a multiple.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. But why, after all, should it not be such a manifold as long
 as it remains one substantial existence, having the multiplicity not
 of a compound being but of a unity with a variety of activities?
 
 Now, no doubt, if these various activities are not themselves
 substantial existences- but merely manifestations of latent
 potentiality- there is no compound; but, on the other hand, 
 it remains
 incomplete until its substantial existence be expressed in 
 act. If its
 substantial existence consists in its Act, and this Act constitutes
 multiplicity, then its substantial existence will be strictly
 proportioned to the extent of the multiplicity.
 
 We allow this to be true for the Intellectual-Principle to which
 we have allotted [the multiplicity of] self-knowing; but for 
 the first
 principle of all, never. Before the manifold, there must be The One,
 that from which the manifold rises: in all numerical series, the
 unit is the first.
 
 But- we will be answered- for number, well and good, since the
 suite makes a compound; but in the real beings why must there be a
 unit from which the multiplicity of entities shall proceed?
 
 Because [failing such a unity] the multiplicity would consist of
 disjointed items, each starting at its own distinct place and moving
 accidentally to serve to a total.
 
 But, they will tell us, the Activities in question do 
 proceed from
 a unity, from the Intellectual-Principle, a simplex.
 
 By that they admit the existence of a simplex prior to the
 Activities; and they make the Activities perdurable and class them
 as substantial existences [hypostases]; but as Hypostases 
 they will be
 distinct from their source, which will remain simplex; while its
 product will in its own nature be manifold and dependent upon it.
 
 Now if these activities arise from some unexplained 
 first activity
 in that principle, then it too contains the manifold: if, on the
 contrary, they are the very earliest activities and the source and
 cause of any multiple product and the means by which that 
 Principle is
 able, before any activity occurs, to remain self-centred, then they
 are allocated to the product of which they are the cause; for this
 principle is one thing, the activities going forth from it are
 another, since it is not, itself, in act. If this be not so, 
 the first
 act cannot be the Intellectual-Principle: the One does not 
 provide for
 the existence of an Intellectual-Principle which thereupon appears;
 that provision would be something [an Hypostasis] intervening
 between the One and the Intellectual-Principle, its offspring. There
 could, in fact, be no such providing in The One, for it was never
 incomplete; and such provision could name nothing that ought to be
 provided. It cannot be thought to possess only some part of its
 content, and not the whole; nor did anything exist to which it could
 turn in desire. Clearly anything that comes into being after it,
 arises without shaking to its permanence in its own habit. It is
 essential to the existence of any new entity that the First remain
 in self-gathered repose throughout: otherwise, it moved before there
 was motion and had intellectual act before any intellection- unless,
 indeed, that first act [as motionless and without intelligence] was
 incomplete, nothing more than a tendency. And what can we imagine it
 lights upon to become the object of such a tendency?
 
 The only reasonable explanation of act flowing from it 
 lies in the
 analogy of light from a sun. The entire intellectual order may be
 figured as a kind of light with the One in repose at its 
 summit as its
 King: but this manifestation is not cast out from it: we may think,
 rather, of the One as a light before the light, an eternal 
 irradiation
 resting upon the Intellectual Realm; this, not identical with its
 source, is yet not severed from it nor of so remote a nature as to
 be less than Real-Being; it is no blind thing, but is seeing and
 knowing, the primal knower.
 
 The One, as transcending Intellect, transcends knowing: above
 all need, it is above the need of the knowing which pertains 
 solely to
 the Secondary Nature. Knowing is a unitary thing, but defined: the
 first is One, but undefined: a defined One would not be the
 One-absolute: the absolute is prior to the definite.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. Thus The One is in truth beyond all statement: any 
 affirmation
 is of a thing; but the all-transcending, resting above even the most
 august divine Mind, possesses alone of all true being, and is not a
 thing among things; we can give it no name because that would imply
 predication: we can but try to indicate, in our own feeble way,
 something concerning it: when in our perplexity we object, 
 "Then it is
 without self-perception, without self-consciousness, ignorant of
 itself"; we must remember that we have been considering it 
 only in its
 opposites.
 
 If we make it knowable, an object of affirmation, we make it a
 manifold; and if we allow intellection in it we make it at that
 point indigent: supposing that in fact intellection accompanies it,
 intellection by it must be superfluous.
 
 Self-intellection- which is the truest- implies the entire
 perception of a total self formed from a variety converging into an
 integral; but the Transcendent knows neither separation of part nor
 any such enquiry; if its intellectual act were directed upon 
 something
 outside, then, the Transcendent would be deficient and the
 intellection faulty.
 
 The wholly simplex and veritable self-sufficing can be lacking
 at no point: self-intellection begins in that principle which,
 secondarily self-sufficing, yet needs itself and therefore needs to
 know itself: this principle, by its self-presence, achieves its
 sufficiency in virtue of its entire content [it is the all]: it
 becomes thus competent from the total of its being, in the act of
 living towards itself and looking upon itself.
 
 Consciousness, as the very word indicates, is a conperception, an
 act exercised upon a manifold: and even intellection, earlier
 [nearer to the divine] though it is, implies that the agent 
 turns back
 upon itself, upon a manifold, then. If that agent says no 
 more than "I
 am a being," it speaks [by the implied dualism] as a 
 discoverer of the
 extern; and rightly so, for being is a manifold; when it 
 faces towards
 the unmanifold and says, "I am that being," it misses both itself
 and the being [since the simplex cannot be thus divided into knower
 and known]: if it is [to utter] truth it cannot indicate by "being"
 something like a stone; in the one phrase multiplicity is asserted;
 for the being thus affirmed- [even] the veritable, as distinguished
 from such a mere container of some trace of being as ought not to be
 called a being since it stands merely as image to archetype- 
 even this
 must possess multiplicity.
 
 But will not each item in that multiplicity be an object of
 intellection to us?
 
 Taken bare and single, no: but Being itself is manifold within
 itself, and whatever else you may name has Being.
 
 This accepted, it follows that anything that is to be thought of
 as the most utterly simplex of all cannot have self-intellection; to
 have that would mean being multiple. The Transcendent, thus, neither
 knows itself nor is known in itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. How, then, do we ourselves come to be speaking of it?
 
 No doubt we deal with it, but we do not state it; we have
 neither knowledge nor intellection of it.
 
 But in what sense do we even deal with it when we have no hold
 upon it?
 
 We do not, it is true, grasp it by knowledge, but that does not
 mean that we are utterly void of it; we hold it not so as to 
 state it,
 but so as to be able to speak about it. And we can and do state what
 it is not, while we are silent as to what it is: we are, in fact,
 speaking of it in the light of its sequels; unable to state 
 it, we may
 still possess it.
 
 Those divinely possessed and inspired have at least the
 knowledge that they hold some greater thing within them though they
 cannot tell what it is; from the movements that stir them and the
 utterances that come from them they perceive the power, not
 themselves, that moves them: in the same way, it must be, we stand
 towards the Supreme when we hold the Intellectual-Principle pure; we
 know the divine Mind within, that which gives Being and all else of
 that order: but we know, too, that other, know that it is none of
 these, but a nobler principle than any-thing we know as Being;
 fuller and greater; above reason, mind and feeling; conferring these
 powers, not to be confounded with them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. Conferring- but how? As itself possessing them or 
 not? How can
 it convey what it does not possess, and yet if it does possess how
 is it simplex? And if, again, it does not, how is it the 
 source of the
 manifold?
 
 A single, unmanifold emanation we may very well allow- how even
 that can come from a pure unity may be a problem, but we may always
 explain it on the analogy of the irradiation from a luminary- but a
 multitudinous production raises question.
 
 The explanation is that what comes from the Supreme cannot be
 identical with it and assuredly cannot be better than it- what could
 be better than The One or the utterly transcendent? The emanation,
 then, must be less good, that is to say, less 
 self-sufficing: now what
 must that be which is less self-sufficing than The One? Obviously
 the Not-One, that is to say, multiplicity, but a 
 multiplicity striving
 towards unity; that is to say, a One-that-is-many.
 
 All that is not One is conserved by virtue of the One, and from
 the One derives its characteristic nature: if it had not 
 attained such
 unity as is consistent with being made up of multiplicity we 
 could not
 affirm its existence: if we are able to affirm the nature of single
 things, this is in virtue of the unity, the identity even, which
 each of them possesses. But the all-transcendent, utterly void of
 multiplicity, has no mere unity of participation but is unity's
 self, independent of all else, as being that from which, by whatever
 means, all the rest take their degree of unity in their 
 standing, near
 or far, towards it.
 
 In virtue of the unity manifested in its variety it 
 exhibits, side
 by side, both an all-embracing identity and the existence of the
 secondary: all the variety lies in the midst of a sameness, and
 identity cannot be separated from diversity since all stands as one;
 each item in that content, by the fact of participating in life, is
 a One-many: for the item could not make itself manifest as a
 One-and-all.
 
 Only the Transcendent can be that; it is the great beginning,
 and the beginning must be a really existent One, wholly and 
 truly One,
 while its sequent, poured down in some way from the One, is all, a
 total which has participation in unity and whose every member is
 similarly all and one.
 
 What then is the All?
 
 The total of which the Transcendent is the Source.
 
 But in what way is it that source? In the sense, perhaps, of
 sustaining things as bestower of the unity of each single item?
 
 That too; but also as having established them in being.
 
 But how? As having, perhaps, contained them previously?
 
 We have indicated that, thus, the First would be a manifold.
 
 May we think, perhaps, that the First contained the 
 universe as an
 indistinct total whose items are elaborated to distinct existence
 within the Second by the Reason-Principle there? That Second is
 certainly an Activity; the Transcendent would contain only the
 potentiality of the universe to come.
 
 But the nature of this contained potentiality would have to be
 explained: it cannot be that of Matter, a receptivity, for thus the
 Source becomes passive- the very negation of production.
 
 How then does it produce what it does not contain? Certainly not
 at haphazard and certainly not by selection. How then?
 
 We have observed that anything that may spring from the One must
 be different from it. Differing, it is not One, since then 
 it would be
 the Source. If unity has given place to duality, from that moment
 there is multiplicity; for here is variety side by side with 
 identity,
 and this imports quality and all the rest.
 
 We may take it as proved that the emanation of the Transcendent
 must be a Not-One something other than pure unity, but that it is a
 multiplicity, and especially that it is such a multiplicity as is
 exhibited in the sequent universe, this is a statement worthy of
 deliberation: some further enquiry must be made, also, as to the
 necessity of any sequel to the First.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. We have, of course, already seen that a secondary must
 follow upon the First, and that this is a power immeasurably 
 fruitful;
 and we indicated that this truth is confirmed by the entire order of
 things since there is nothing, not even in the lowest ranks, void of
 the power of generating. We have now to add that, since things
 engendered tend downwards and not upwards and, especially, move
 towards multiplicity, the first principle of all must be less a
 manifold than any.
 
 That which engenders the world of sense cannot itself be a
 sense-world; it must be the Intellect and the Intellectual world;
 similarly, the prior which engenders the Intellectual-Principle and
 the Intellectual world cannot be either, but must be 
 something of less
 multiplicity. The manifold does not rise from the manifold: the
 intellectual multiplicity has its source in what is not manifold; by
 the mere fact of being manifold, the thing is not the first 
 principle:
 we must look to something earlier.
 
 All must be grouped under a unity which, as standing outside of
 all multiplicity and outside of any ordinary simplicity, is the
 veritably and essentially simplex.
 
 Still, how can a Reason-Principle [the Intellectual],
 characteristically a manifold, a total, derive from what is
 obviously no Reason-Principle?
 
 But how, failing such origin in the simplex, could we 
 escape [what
 cannot be accepted] the derivation of a Reason-Principle from a
 Reason-Principle?
 
 And how does the secondarily good [the imaged Good] derive from
 The Good, the Absolute? What does it hold from the Absolute Good to
 entitle it to the name?
 
 Similarity to the prior is not enough, it does not help towards
 goodness; we demand similarity only to an actually existent Good:
 the goodness must depend upon derivation from a Prior of 
 such a nature
 that the similarity is desirable because that Prior is good, just as
 the similarity would be undesirable if the Prior were not good.
 
 Does the similarity with the Prior consist, then, in a voluntary
 resting upon it?
 
 It is rather that, finding its condition satisfying, it seeks
 nothing: the similarity depends upon the all-sufficiency of what it
 possesses; its existence is agreeable because all is present to it,
 and present in such a way as not to be even different from it
 [Intellectual-Principle is Being].
 
 All life belongs to it, life brilliant and perfect; thus 
 all in it
 is at once life-principle and Intellectual-Principle, nothing in it
 aloof from either life or intellect: it is therefore self-sufficing
 and seeks nothing: and if it seeks nothing this is because it has in
 itself what, lacking, it must seek. It has, therefore, its 
 Good within
 itself, either by being of that order- in what we have 
 called its life
 and intellect- or in some other quality or character going to
 produce these.
 
 If this [secondary principle] were The Good [The Absolute],
 nothing could transcend these things, life and intellect: but, given
 the existence of something higher, this Intellectual-Principle must
 possess a life directed towards that Transcendent, dependent upon
 it, deriving its being from it, living towards it as towards its
 source. The First, then, must transcend this principle of life and
 intellect which directs thither both the life in itself, a 
 copy of the
 Reality of the First, and the intellect in itself which is again a
 copy, though of what original there we cannot know.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. But what can it be which is loftier than that existence- a
 life compact of wisdom, untouched by struggle and error, or than
 this Intellect which holds the Universe with all there is of life
 and intellect?
 
 If we answer "The Making Principle," there comes the question,
 "making by what virtue?" and unless we can indicate something higher
 there than in the made, our reasoning has made no advance: we rest
 where we were.
 
 We must go higher- if it were only for the reason that the maker
 of all must have a self-sufficing existence outside of all things-
 since all the rest is patently indigent- and that everything has
 participated in The One and, as drawing on unity, is itself 
 not unity.
 
 What then is this in which each particular entity participates,
 the author of being to the universe and to each item of the total?
 
 Since it is the author of all that exists, and since the
 multiplicity in each thing is converted into a self-sufficing
 existence by this presence of The One, so that even the particular
 itself becomes self-sufficing, then clearly this principle, author
 at once of Being and of self-sufficingness, is not itself a Being but
 is above Being and above even self-sufficing.
 
 May we stop, content, with that? No: the Soul is yet, and even
 more, in pain. Is she ripe, perhaps, to bring forth, now that in her
 pangs she has come so close to what she seeks? No: we must call upon
 yet another spell if anywhere the assuagement is to be found.
 Perhaps in what has already been uttered, there lies the 
 charm if only
 we tell it over often? No: we need a new, a further, incantation.
 All our effort may well skim over every truth and through all the
 verities in which we have part, and yet the reality escape us when
 we hope to affirm, to understand: for the understanding, in order to
 its affirmation must possess itself of item after item; only so does
 it traverse all the field: but how can there be any such 
 peregrination
 of that in which there is no variety?
 
 All the need is met by a contact purely intellective. At the
 moment of touch there is no power whatever to make any affirmation;
 there is no leisure; reasoning upon the vision is for afterwards. We
 may know we have had the vision when the Soul has suddenly taken
 light. This light is from the Supreme and is the Supreme; we may
 believe in the Presence when, like that other God on the call of a
 certain man, He comes bringing light: the light is the proof of the
 advent. Thus, the Soul unlit remains without that vision; lit, it
 possesses what it sought. And this is the true end set before the
 Soul, to take that light, to see the Supreme by the Supreme 
 and not by
 the light of any other principle- to see the Supreme which 
 is also the
 means to the vision; for that which illumines the Soul is that which
 it is to see just as it is by the sun's own light that we 
 see the sun.
 
 But how is this to be accomplished?
 
 Cut away everything.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FOURTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 HOW THE SECONDARIES RISE FROM THE FIRST:
 
 AND ON THE ONE.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Anything existing after The First must necessarily arise from
 that First, whether immediately or as tracing back to it through
 intervenients; there must be an order of secondaries and tertiaries,
 in which any second is to be referred to The First, any third to the
 second.
 
 Standing before all things, there must exist a Simplex,
 differing from all its sequel, self-gathered not inter-blended with
 the forms that rise from it, and yet able in some mode of its own to
 be present to those others: it must be authentically a unity, not
 merely something elaborated into unity and so in reality no more
 than unity's counterfeit; it will debar all telling and 
 knowing except
 that it may be described as transcending Being- for if there were
 nothing outside all alliance and compromise, nothing authentically
 one, there would be no Source. Untouched by multiplicity, it will be
 wholly self-sufficing, an absolute First, whereas any not-first
 demands its earlier, and any non-simplex needs the 
 simplicities within
 itself as the very foundations of its composite existence.
 
 There can be only one such being: if there were another, the two
 [as indiscernible] would resolve into one, for we are not 
 dealing with
 two corporal entities.
 
 Our One-First is not a body: a body is not simplex and, 
 as a thing
 of process cannot be a First, the Source cannot be a thing of
 generation: only a principle outside of body, and utterly 
 untouched by
 multiplicity, could be The First.
 
 Any unity, then, later than The First must be no longer simplex;
 it can be no more than a unity in diversity.
 
 Whence must such a sequent arise?
 
 It must be an offspring of The First; for suppose it the product
 of chance, that First ceases to be the Principle of All.
 
 But how does it arise from The First?
 
 If The First is perfect, utterly perfect above all, and is the
 beginning of all power, it must be the most powerful of all that is,
 and all other powers must act in some partial imitation of it. Now
 other beings, coming to perfection, are observed to 
 generate; they are
 unable to remain self-closed; they produce: and this is true not
 merely of beings endowed with will, but of growing things where
 there is no will; even lifeless objects impart something of
 themselves, as far as they may; fire warms, snow chills, drugs have
 their own outgoing efficacy; all things to the utmost of their power
 imitate the Source in some operation tending to eternity and to
 service.
 
 How then could the most perfect remain self-set- the First Good,
 the Power towards all, how could it grudge or be powerless to give
 of itself, and how at that would it still be the Source?
 
 If things other than itself are to exist, things 
 dependent upon it
 for their reality, it must produce since there is no other 
 source. And
 further this engendering principle must be the very highest in
 worth; and its immediate offspring, its secondary, must be 
 the best of
 all that follows.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. If the Intellectual-Principle were the engendering 
 Source, then
 the engendered secondary, while less perfect than the
 Intellectual-Principle, would be close to it and similar to it: but
 since the engendering Source is above the Intellectual-Principle,
 the secondary can only be that principle.
 
 But why is the Intellectual-Principle not the generating source?
 
 Because [it is not a self-sufficing simplex]: the Act of the
 Intellectual-Principle is intellection, which means that, seeing the
 intellectual object towards which it has turned, it is 
 consummated, so
 to speak, by that object, being in itself indeterminate like sight
 [a vague readiness for any and every vision] and determined by the
 intellectual object. This is why it has been said that "out of the
 indeterminate dyad and The One arise the Ideas and the numbers": for
 the dyad is the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 Thus it is not a simplex; it is manifold; it exhibits a certain
 composite quality- within the Intellectual or divine order, 
 of course-
 as the principle that sees the manifold. It is, further, itself
 simultaneously object and agent of intellection and is on that count
 also a duality: and it possesses besides another object of
 intellection in the Order following upon itself.
 
 But how can the Intellectual-Principle be a product of the
 Intellectual Object?
 
 In this way: the intellectual object is self-gathered
 [self-compact] and is not deficient as the seeing and knowing
 principle must be- deficient, mean, as needing an object- it is
 therefore no unconscious thing: all its content and accompaniment
 are its possession; it is self-distinguishing throughout; it is the
 seat of life as of all things; it is, itself, that self-intellection
 which takes place in eternal repose, that is to say, in a mode other
 than that of the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 But if something comes to being within an entity which in no way
 looks outside itself- and especially within a being which is the sum
 of being- that entity must be the source of the new thing: stable in
 its own identity, it produces; but the product is that of an 
 unchanged
 being: the producer is unchangeably the intellectual object, the
 product is produced as the Intellectual Act, an Act taking
 intellection of its source- the only object that exists for 
 it- and so
 becoming Intellectual-Principle, that is to say, becoming another
 intellectual being, resembling its source, a reproduction 
 and image of
 that.
 
 But how from amid perfect rest can an Act arise?
 
 There is in everything the Act of the Essence and the Act going
 out from the Essence: the first Act is the thing itself in its
 realized identity, the second Act is an inevitably following outgo
 from the first, an emanation distinct from the thing itself.
 
 Thus even in fire there is the warmth comported by its essential
 nature and there is the warmth going instantaneously outward 
 from that
 characterizing heat by the fact that the fire, remaining
 unchangeably fire, utters the Act native to its essential reality.
 
 So it is in the divine also: or rather we have there the earlier
 form of the double act: the divine remains in its own unchanging
 being, but from its perfection and from the Act included in 
 its nature
 there emanates the secondary or issuing Act which- as the output of
 a mighty power, the mightiest there is- attains to Real Being as
 second to that which stands above all Being. That 
 transcendent was the
 potentiality of the All; this secondary is the All made actual.
 
 And if this is all things, that must be above and outside of
 all, so, must transcend real being. And again, if that secondary is
 all things, and if above its multiplicity there is a unity 
 not ranking
 among those things, once more this unity transcends Real Being and
 therefore transcends the Intellectual-Principle as well. 
 There is thus
 something transcending Intellectual-Principle, for we must remember
 that real being is no corpse, the negation of life and of
 intellection, but is in fact identical with the
 Intellectual-Principle. The Intellectual-Principle is not something
 taking cognisance of things as sensation deals with sense objects
 existing independently of sense: on the contrary, it actually is the
 things it knows: the ideas constituting them it has not borrowed:
 whence could it have taken them? No: it exists here together with
 the things of the universe, identical with them, making a unity with
 them; and the collective knowledge [in the divine mind] of the
 immaterial is the universe of things.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIFTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 THAT THE INTELLECTUAL BEINGS ARE NOT OUTSIDE
 
 THE INTELLECTUAL-PRINCIPLE: AND ON
 
 THE NATURE OF THE GOOD.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. The Intellectual-Principle, the veritably and essentially
 intellective, can this be conceived as ever falling into error, ever
 failing to think reality?
 
 Assuredly no: it would no longer be intelligent and therefore no
 longer Intellectual-Principle: it must know unceasingly- and never
 forget; and its knowledge can be no guesswork, no hesitating assent,
 no acceptance of an alien report. Nor can it call on 
 demonstration or,
 we are told it may at times act by this or, I method, at least there
 must be something patent to it in virtue of its own nature. In
 actual fact reason tells us that all its knowledge is thus 
 inherent to
 it, for there is no means by which to distinguish between the
 spontaneous knowledge and the other. But, in any case, some 
 knowledge,
 it is conceded, is inherent to it. Whence are we to understand the
 certainty of this knowledge to come to it or how do its objects
 carry the conviction of their reality?
 
 Consider sense-knowledge: its objects seem most patently
 certified, yet the doubt returns whether the apparent reality may
 not lie in the states of the percipient rather than in the material
 before him; the decision demands intelligence or reasoning. Besides,
 even granting that what the senses grasp is really contained in the
 objects, none the less what is thus known by the senses is an image:
 sense can never grasp the thing itself; this remains for 
 ever outside.
 
 Now, if the Intellectual-Principle in its act- that is in
 knowing the intellectual- is to know these its objects as alien, we
 have to explain how it makes contact with them: obviously it might
 never come upon them, and so might never know them; or it might know
 them only upon the meeting: its knowing, at that, would not be an
 enduring condition. If we are told that the 
 Intellectual-Principle and
 the Intellectual Objects are linked in a standing unity, we 
 demand the
 description of this unity.
 
 Next, the intellections would be impressions, that is to say not
 native act but violence from without: now how is such impressing
 possible and what shape could the impressions bear?
 
 Intellection, again, becomes at this a mere handling of the
 external, exactly like sense-perception. What then distinguishes it
 unless that it deals with objects of less extension? And what
 certitude can it have that its knowledge is true? Or what enables it
 to pronounce that the object is good, beautiful, or just, 
 when each of
 these ideas is to stand apart from itself? The very principles of
 judgement, by which it must be guided, would be [as Ideas] excluded:
 with objects and canons alike outside it, so is truth.
 
 Again; either the objects of the Intellectual-Principle are
 senseless and devoid of life and intellect or they are in possession
 of Intellect.
 
 Now, if they are in possession of Intellect, that realm 
 is a union
 of both and is Truth. This combined Intellectual realm will be the
 Primal Intellect: we have only then to examine how this reality,
 conjoint of Intellectual-Principle and its object, is to be
 understood, whether as combining self-united identity with 
 yet duality
 and difference, or what other relation holds between them.
 
 If on the contrary the objects of Intellectual-Principle are
 without intelligence and life, what are they? They cannot be 
 premises,
 axioms or predicates: as predicates they would not have real
 existence; they would be affirmations linking separate entities, as
 when we affirm that justice is good though justice and good are
 distinct realities.
 
 If we are told that they are self-standing entities- the
 distinct beings Justice and Good- then [supposing them to be
 outside] the Intellectual Realm will not be a unity nor be 
 included in
 any unity: all is sundered individuality. Where, then, are they and
 what spatial distinction keeps them apart? How does the
 Intellectual-Principle come to meet with them as it travels round;
 what keeps each true to its character; what gives them enduring
 identity; what conceivable shape or character can they have? They
 are being presented to us as some collection of figures, in gold or
 some other material substance, the work of some unknown sculptor or
 graver: but at once the Intellectual-Principle which 
 contemplates them
 becomes sense-perception; and there still remains the 
 question how one
 of them comes to be Justice and another something else.
 
 But the great argument is that if we are to allow that these
 objects of Intellection are in the strict sense outside the
 Intellectual-Principle, which, therefore, must see them as external,
 then inevitably it cannot possess the truth of them.
 
 In all it looks upon, it sees falsely; for those objects must be
 the authentic things; yet it looks upon them without containing them
 and in such knowledge holds only their images; that is to say, not
 containing the authentic, adopting phantasms of the true, it 
 holds the
 false; it never possesses reality. If it knows that it possesses the
 false, it must confess itself excluded from the truth; if it fails
 of this knowledge also, imagining itself to possess the truth which
 has eluded it, then the doubled falsity puts it the deeper 
 into error.
 
 It is thus, I suppose, that in sense-perception we have belief
 instead of truth; belief is our lief; we satisfy ourselves with
 something very different from the original which is the occasion of
 perception.
 
 In fine, there would be on the hypothesis no truth in the
 Intellectual-Principle. But such an Intellectual-Principle would not
 be truth, nor truly an Intellectual-Principle. There would be no
 Intellectual-Principle at all [no Divine Mind]: yet elsewhere truth
 cannot be.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Thus we may not look for the Intellectual objects [the Ideas]
 outside of the Intellectual-Principle, treating them as 
 impressions of
 reality upon it: we cannot strip it of truth and so make its objects
 unknowable and non-existent and in the end annul the
 Intellectual-Principle itself. We must provide for knowledge and for
 truth; we must secure reality; being must become knowable
 essentially and not merely in that knowledge of quality which could
 give us a mere image or vestige of the reality in lieu of
 possession, intimate association, absorption.
 
 The only way to this is to leave nothing out side of the 
 veritable
 Intellectual-Principle which thus has knowledge in the true knowing
 [that of identification with the object], cannot forget, need not go
 wandering in search. At once truth is there, this is the seat of the
 authentic Existents, it becomes living and intellective: 
 these are the
 essentials of that most lofty Principle; and, failing them, where is
 its worth, its grandeur?
 
 Only thus [by this inherence of the Ideas] is it dispensed from
 demonstration and from acts of faith in the truth of its 
 knowledge: it
 is its entire self, self-perspicuous: it knows a prior by
 recognising its own source; it knows a sequent to that prior by its
 self-identity; of the reality of this sequent, of the fact that it
 is present and has authentic existence, no outer entity can bring it
 surer conviction.
 
 Thus veritable truth is not accordance with an external; it is
 self-accordance; it affirms and is nothing other than itself and is
 nothing other; it is at once existence and self-affirmation. What
 external, then, can call it to the question, and from what source of
 truth could the refutation be brought? Any counter affirmation [of
 truth] must fall into identity with the truth which first uttered
 itself; brought forward as new, it has to appear before the
 Principle which made the earlier statement and to show itself
 identical with that: for there is no finding anything truer than the
 true.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Thus we have here one identical Principle, the 
 Intellect, which
 is the universe of authentic beings, the Truth: as such it is a
 great god or, better, not a god among gods but the Godhead entire.
 It is a god, a secondary god manifesting before there is any 
 vision of
 that other, the Supreme which rests over all, enthroned in
 transcendence upon that splendid pediment, the Nature following
 close upon it.
 
 The Supreme in its progress could never be borne forward 
 upon some
 soulless vehicle nor even directly upon the soul: it will be
 heralded by some ineffable beauty: before the great King in his
 progress there comes first the minor train, then rank by rank the
 greater and more exalted, closer to the King the kinglier; next his
 own honoured company until, last among all these grandeurs, suddenly
 appears the Supreme Monarch himself, and all- unless indeed for
 those who have contented themselves with the spectacle before his
 coming and gone away- prostrate themselves and hail him.
 
 In that royal progress the King is of another order from those
 that go before him, but the King in the Supreme is no ruler over
 externs; he holds that most just of governances, rooted in 
 nature, the
 veritable kingship, for he is King of Truth, holding sway by all
 reason over a dense offspring his own, a host that shares his
 divinity, King over a king and over kings and even more justly
 called father of Gods.
 
 [Interpolation: Zeus (Universal Soul) is in this a symbol of
 him, Zeus who is not content with the contemplation of his father
 (Kronos, divine Intellect) but looks to that father's father (to
 Ouranos, the Transcendent) as what may be called the divine energy
 working to the establishment of a real being.]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. We have said that all must be brought back to a unity: this
 must be an authentic unity, not belonging to the order in which
 multiplicity is unified by participation in what is truly a One; we
 need a unity independent of participation, not a combination in
 which multiplicity holds an equal place: we have exhibited, also,
 the Intellectual Realm and the Intellectual-Principle as more
 closely a unity than the rest of things, so that there is nothing
 closer to The One. Yet even this is not The purely One.
 
 This purely One, essentially a unity untouched by the multiple,
 this we now desire to penetrate if in any way we may.
 
 Only by a leap can we reach to this One which is to be 
 pure of all
 else, halting sharp in fear of slipping ever so little aside and
 impinging on the dual: for if we fail of the centre, we are in a
 duality which does not even include The authentic One but belongs on
 both sides, to the later order. The One does not bear to be numbered
 in with anything else, with a one or a two or any such quantity; it
 refuses to take number because it is measure and not the measured;
 it is no peer of other entities to be found among them; for thus, it
 and they alike would be included in some container and this would be
 its prior, the prior it cannot have. Not even essential [ideal or
 abstract] number can belong to The One and certainly not the still
 later number applying to quantities; for essential number first
 appears as providing duration to the divine Intellection, while
 quantitative number is that [still later and lower] which furnishes
 the Quantity found in conjunction with other things or which
 provides for Quantity independent of things, if this is to be
 thought of as number at all. The Principle which in objects having
 quantitative number looks to the unity from which they spring is a
 copy [or lower phase] of the Principle which in the earlier order of
 number [in essential or ideal number] looks to the veritable One;
 and it attains its existence without in the least degree dissipating
 or shattering that prior unity: the dyad has come into being, but
 the precedent monad still stands; and this monad is quite distinct
 within the dyad from either of the two constituent unities, since
 there is nothing to make it one rather than the other: being
 neither, but simply that thing apart, it is present without being
 inherent.
 
 But how are the two unities distinct and how is the dyad a
 unity, and is this unity the same as the unity by which each of the
 constituents is one thing?
 
 Our answer must be that the unity is that of a participation in
 the primal unity with the participants remaining distinct 
 from that in
 which they partake; the dyad, in so far as it is one thing, has this
 participation, but in a certain degree only; the unity of an army is
 not that of a single building; the dyad, as a thing of extension, is
 not strictly a unit either quantitatively or in manner of being.
 
 Are we then to take it that the monads in the pentad and decad
 differ while the unity in the pentad is the same as that in the
 decad?
 
 Yes, in the sense in which, big and little, ship is one 
 with ship,
 army with army, city with city; otherwise, no. But certain
 difficulties in this matter will be dealt with later.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. We return to our statement that The First remains intact even
 when other entities spring from it.
 
 In the case of numbers, the unit remains intact while something
 else produces, and thus number arises in dependence on the unit:
 much more then does the unit, The One, remain intact in the
 principle which is before all beings; especially since the entities
 produced in its likeness, while it thus remains intact, owe their
 existence to no other, but to its own all-sufficient power.
 
 And just as there is, primarily or secondarily, some form or
 idea from the monad in each of the successive numbers- the 
 later still
 participating, though unequally, in the unit- so the series of
 Beings following upon The First bear, each, some form or idea
 derived from that source. In Number the participation establishes
 Quantity; in the realm of Being, the trace of The One establishes
 reality: existence is a trace of The One- our word for entity may
 probably be connected with that for unity.
 
 What we know as Being, the first sequent upon The One, advanced
 a little outward, so to speak, then chose to go no further, turned
 inward again and comes to rest and is now the reality and hearth
 [ousia and hestia] of the universe. Pressing [with the rough
 breathing] on the word for Being [on] we have the word "hen" 
 [one], an
 indication that in our very form of speech we tell, as far as may
 be, that Being [the weaker] is that which proceeds from [the 
 stronger]
 The One. Thus both the thing that comes to be and Being itself are
 carriers of a copy, since they are outflows from the power of The
 primal One: this power sees and in its emotion tries to 
 represent what
 it sees and breaks into speech "On"; "einai"; "ousia," "hestia"
 [Existent: Existence: Essence: Hestia or Hearth], sounds which
 labour to express the essential nature of the universe 
 produced by the
 travail of the utterer and so to represent, as far as sounds may,
 the origin of reality.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. All this, however, we may leave to individual judgement: to
 proceed:
 
 This produced reality is an Ideal form- for certainly nothing
 springing from the Supreme can be less- and it is not a particular
 form but the form of all, beside which there is no other; it follows
 that The First must be without form, and, if without form, then it
 is no Being; Being must have some definition and therefore 
 be limited;
 but the First cannot be thought of as having definition and 
 limit, for
 thus it would be not the Source but the particular item indicated by
 the definition assigned to it. If all things belong to the produced,
 which of them can be thought of as the Supreme? Not included among
 them, this can be described only as transcending them: but they are
 Being and the Beings; it therefore transcends Being.
 
 Note that the phrase transcending Being assigns no character,
 makes no assertion, allots no name, carries only the denial of
 particular being; and in this there is no attempt to circumscribe
 it: to seek to throw a line about that illimitable Nature would be
 folly, and anyone thinking to do so cuts himself off from any
 slightest and most momentary approach to its least vestige.
 
 As one wishing to contemplate the Intellectual Nature will lay
 aside all the representations of sense and so may see what
 transcends the sense-realm, in the same way one wishing to 
 contemplate
 what transcends the Intellectual attains by putting away all that is
 of the intellect, taught by the intellect, no doubt, that the
 Transcendent exists but never seeking to define it.
 
 Its definition, in fact, could be only "the indefinable": what
 is not a thing is not some definite thing. We are in agony for a
 true expression; we are talking of the untellable; we name, only to
 indicate for our own use as best we may. And this name, The One,
 contains really no more than the negation of plurality: 
 under the same
 pressure the Pythagoreans found their indication in the symbol
 "Apollo" [a= not; pollon= of many] with its repudiation of the
 multiple. If we are led to think positively of The One, name and
 thing, there would be more truth in silence: the designation, a mere
 aid to enquiry, was never intended for more than a preliminary
 affirmation of absolute simplicity to be followed by the rejection
 of even that statement: it was the best that offered, but remains
 inadequate to express the Nature indicated. For this is a principle
 not to be conveyed by any sound; it cannot be known on any hearing
 but, if at all, by vision; and to hope in that vision to see 
 a form is
 to fail of even that.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Consider the act of ocular vision:
 
 There are two elements here; there is the form perceptible to
 the sense and there is the medium by which the eye sees that form.
 This medium is itself perceptible to the eye, distinct from the form
 to be seen, but the cause of the seeing; it is perceived at the one
 stroke in that form and on it and, hence, is not distinguished from
 it, the eye being held entirely by the illuminated object. 
 When on the
 contrary this medium presents itself alone it is seen 
 directly- though
 even then actual sight demands some solid base; there must be
 something besides the medium which, unless embracing some object,
 eludes perception; thus the light inherent to the sun would not be
 perceived but for the solidity of the mass. If it is 
 objected that the
 sun is light entire, this would only be a proof of our assertion: no
 other visible form will contain light which must, then, have no
 other property than that of visibility, and in fact all other
 visible objects are something more than light alone.
 
 So it is with the act of vision in the Intellectual Principle.
 
 This vision sees, by another light, the objects 
 illuminated by the
 First Principle: setting itself among them, it sees veritably;
 declining towards the lower Nature, that upon which the light from
 above rests, it has less of that vision. Passing over the visible
 and looking to the medium by which it sees, then it holds the Light
 and the source of Light.
 
 But since the Intellectual-Principle is not to see this light as
 something external we return to our analogy; the eye is not wholly
 dependent upon an outside and alien light; there is an earlier light
 within itself, a more brilliant, which it sees sometimes in a
 momentary flash. At night in the darkness a gleam leaps from within
 the eye: or again we make no effort to see anything; the eyelids
 close; yet a light flashes before us; or we rub the eye and it sees
 the light it contains. This is sight without the act, but it is the
 truest seeing, for it sees light whereas its other objects were the
 lit not the light.
 
 It is certainly thus that the Intellectual-Principle, hiding
 itself from all the outer, withdrawing to the inmost, seeing
 nothing, must have its vision- not of some other light in some other
 thing but of the light within itself, unmingled, pure, suddenly
 gleaming before it;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. So that we are left wondering whence it came, from within or
 without; and when it has gone, we say, "It was here. Yet no; it was
 beyond!" But we ought not to question whence; there is no whence, no
 coming or going in place; now it is seen and now not seen. 
 We must not
 run after it, but fit ourselves for the vision and then wait
 tranquilly for its appearance, as the eye waits on the rising of the
 sun, which in its own time appears above the horizon- out of the
 ocean, as the poets say- and gives itself to our sight.
 
 This Principle, of which the sun is an image, where has it its
 dawning, what horizon does it surmount to appear?
 
 It stands immediately above the contemplating Intellect which
 has held itself at rest towards the vision, looking to nothing else
 than the good and beautiful, setting its entire being to that in a
 perfect surrender, and now tranquilly filled with power and taking a
 new beauty to itself, gleaming in the light of that presence.
 
 This advent, still, is not by expectation: it is a coming
 without approach; the vision is not of something that must enter but
 of something present before all else, before the Intellect 
 itself made
 any movement. Yet it is the Intellect that must move, to come and to
 go- going because it has not known where it should stay and 
 where that
 presence stays, the nowhere contained.
 
 And if the Intellect, too, could hold itself in that nowhere-
 not that it is ever in place; it too is uncontained, utterly 
 unplaced-
 it would remain for ever in the vision of its prior, or, indeed, not
 in vision but in identity, all duality annulled. But it is Intellect
 [having a sphere of its own] and, when it is to see, it must see by
 that in it which is not Intellect [by its divinest power].
 
 No doubt it is wonderful that The First should thus be present
 without any coming, and that, while it is nowhere, nowhere is it
 not; but wonderful though this be in itself, the contrary would be
 more wonderful to those who know. Of course neither this contrary
 nor the wonder at it can be entertained. But we must explain:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. Everything brought into being under some principle not itself
 is contained either within its maker or, if there is any 
 intermediate,
 within that: having a prior essential to its being, it needs that
 prior always, otherwise it would not be contained at all. It is the
 order of nature: The last in the immediately preceding lasts, things
 of the order of the Firsts within their prior-firsts, and so thing
 within thing up to the very pinnacle of source.
 
 That Source, having no prior, cannot be contained: uncontained
 by any of those other forms of being, each held within the series of
 priors, it is orbed round all, but so as not to be pointed 
 off to hold
 them part for part; it possesses but is not possessed. Holding all-
 though itself nowhere held- it is omnipresent, for where its
 presence failed something would elude its hold. At the same time, in
 the sense that it is nowhere held, it is not present: thus it is
 both present and not present; not present as not being circumscribed
 by anything; yet, as being utterly unattached, not inhibited from
 presence at any point. That inhibition would mean that the First was
 determined by some other being; the later series, then, would be
 without part in the Supreme; God has His limit and is no longer
 self-governed but mastered by inferiors.
 
 While the contained must be where its container is, what is
 uncontained by place is not debarred from any: for, imagine a place
 where it is not and evidently some other place retains it; at once
 it is contained and there is an end of its placelessness.
 
 But if the "nowhere" is to stand and the ascription of a
 "where," implying station in the extern, is to fall, then nothing
 can be left void; and at once- nothing void, yet no point
 containing- God is sovereignly present through all. We 
 cannot think of
 something of God here and something else there, nor of all God
 gathered at some one spot: there is an instantaneous presence
 everywhere, nothing containing and nothing left void, everything
 therefore fully held by the divine.
 
 Consider our universe. There is none before it and 
 therefore it is
 not, itself, in a universe or in any place- what place was there
 before the universe came to be?- its linked members form and occupy
 the whole. But Soul is not in the universe, on the contrary the
 universe is in the Soul; bodily substance is not a place to the
 Soul; Soul is contained in Intellectual-Principle and is the 
 container
 of body. The Intellectual-Principle in turn is contained in
 something else; but that prior principle has nothing in which to be:
 the First is therefore in nothing, and, therefore, nowhere. But all
 the rest must be somewhere; and where but in the First?
 
 This can mean only that the First is neither remote from things
 nor directly within them; there is nothing containing it; it
 contains all. It is The Good to the universe if only in this 
 way, that
 towards it all things have their being, all dependent upon 
 it, each in
 its mode, so that thing rises above thing in goodness 
 according to its
 fuller possession of authentic being.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. Still, do not, I urge you, look for The Good through any of
 these other things; if you do, you will see not itself but its
 trace: you must form the idea of that which is to be grasped cleanly
 standing to itself not in any combination, the unheld in which all
 have hold: for no other is such, yet one such there must be.
 
 Now it is clear that we cannot possess ourselves of the power of
 this principle in its concentrated fulness: so to do one must be
 identical with it: but some partial attainment is within our reach.
 
 You who make the venture will throw forward all your 
 being but you
 will never tell it entire- for that, you must yourself be the divine
 Intellect in Act- and at your utmost success it will still pass from
 you or, rather, you from it. In ordinary vision you may think to see
 the object entire: in this intellective act, all, less or more, that
 you can take to mind you may set down as The Good.
 
 It is The Good since, being a power [being effective outwardly],
 it is the cause of the intelligent and intellective life as of life
 and intellect: for these grow from it as from the source of essence
 and of existence, the Source as being One, simplex and first because
 before it was nothing. All derives from this: it is the origin of
 the primal movement which it does not possess and of the repose
 which is but its absence of need; for neither rest nor movement can
 belong to that which has no place in which either could 
 occur; centre,
 object, ground, all are alike unknown to it, for it is 
 before all. Yet
 its Being is not limited; what is there to set bounds to it? Nor, on
 the other hand, is it infinite in the sense of magnitude; what place
 can there be to which it must extend, or why should there be
 movement where there is no lacking? All its infinitude resides in
 its power: it does not change and will not fail; and in it 
 all that is
 unfailing finds duration.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. It is infinite also by right of being a pure unity with
 nothing towards which to direct any partial content. Absolutely One,
 it has never known measure and stands outside of number, and so is
 under no limit either in regard to any extern or within itself; for
 any such determination would bring something of the dual into it.
 And having no constituent parts it accepts no pattern, forms 
 no shape.
 
 Reason recognising it as such a nature, you may not hope 
 to see it
 with mortal eyes, nor in any way that would be imagined by those who
 make sense the test of reality and so annul the supremely real. For
 what passes for the most truly existent is most truly non-existent-
 the thing of extension least real of all- while this unseen First is
 the source and principle of Being and sovereign over Reality.
 
 You must turn appearances about or you will be left void of God.
 You will be like those at the festivals who in their gluttony cram
 themselves with things which none going to the gods may touch; they
 hold these goods to be more real than the vision of the God who is
 to be honoured and they go away having had no share in the
 sanctities of the shrine.
 
 In these celebrations of which we speak, the unseen god leaves
 those in doubt of his existence who think nothing patent but what
 may be known to the flesh: it happens as if a man slept a 
 life through
 and took the dream world in perfect trust; wake him, and he would
 refuse belief to the report of his open eyes and settle down to
 sleep again.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. Knowing demands the organ fitted to the object; eyes for one
 kind, ears for another: similarly some things, we must 
 believe, are to
 be known by the Intellectual-Principle in us. We must not confuse
 intellection with hearing or seeing; this would be trying to 
 look with
 the ears or denying sound because it is not seen. Certain people, we
 must keep in mind, have forgotten that to which, from the beginning
 onwards, their longing and effort are pointed: for all that exists
 desires and aspires towards the Supreme by a compulsion of nature,
 as if all had received the oracle that without it they cannot be.
 
 The perception of Beauty and the awe and the stirring of passion
 towards it are for those already in some degree knowing and
 awakened: but the Good, as possessed long since and setting up a
 natural tendency, is inherently present to even those asleep and
 brings them no wonder when some day they see it, since it is no
 occasional reminiscence but is always with them though in 
 their drowse
 they are not aware of it: the love of Beauty on the contrary sets up
 pain when it appears, for those that have seen it must pursue. This
 love of Beauty then is later than the love of Good and comes with a
 more sophisticated understanding; hence we know that Beauty is a
 secondary: the more primal appetition, not patent to sense, our
 movement towards our good, gives witness that The Good is 
 the earlier,
 the prior.
 
 Again; all that have possessed themselves of The Good feel it
 sufficient: they have attained the end: but Beauty not all have
 known and those that have judge it to exist for itself and not for
 them, as in the charm of this world the beauty belongs only to its
 possessor.
 
 Then, too, it is thought enough to appear loveable whether one
 is so or not: but no one wants his Good in semblance only. All are
 seeking The First as something ranking before aught else, but they
 struggle venomously for beauty as something secondary like 
 themselves:
 thus some minor personage may perhaps challenge equal honour with
 the King's right-hand man on pretext of similar dependence, 
 forgetting
 that, while both owe their standing to the monarch, the other holds
 the higher rank.
 
 The source of the error is that while both The Good and The
 Beautiful participate in the common source, The One precedes 
 both; and
 that, in the Supreme also, The Good has no need of The Beautiful,
 while the Beautiful does need The Good.
 
 The Good is gentle and friendly and tender, and we have 
 it present
 when we but will. Beauty is all violence and stupefaction; its
 pleasure is spoiled with pain, and it even draws the thoughtless
 away from The Good as some attraction will lure the child from the
 father's side: these things tell of youth. The Good is the older-
 not in time but by degree of reality- and it has the higher and
 earlier power, all power in fact, for the sequent holds only a power
 subordinate and delegated of which the prior remains sovereign.
 
 Not that God has any need of His derivatives: He ignores all
 that produced realm, never necessary to Him, and remains identically
 what He was before He brought it into being. So too, had the 
 secondary
 never existed, He would have been unconcerned, exactly as He 
 would not
 have grudged existence to any other universe that might spring into
 being from Him, were any such possible; of course no other such
 could be since there is nothing that has not existence once the All
 exists.
 
 But God never was the All; that would make Him dependent upon
 the universe: transcending all, He was able at once to make 
 all things
 and to leave them to their own being, He above.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. The Supreme, as the Absolute Good and not merely a good
 being or thing, can contain nothing, since there is nothing 
 that could
 be its good.
 
 Anything it could contain must be either good to it or not good;
 but in the supremely and primally Good there can be nothing not
 good; nor can the Absolute Good be a container to the Good:
 containing, then, neither the good nor the not good it contains
 nothing and, containing nothing, it is alone: it is void of all but
 itself.
 
 If the rest of being either is good- without being the absolute
 good- or is not good, while on the other hand the Supreme contains
 neither what is good nor what is not good, then, containing nothing,
 it is The Good by that very absence of content.
 
 Thus we rob it of its very being as The Absolute Good if we
 ascribe anything to it, existence or intellect or goodness. The only
 way is to make every denial and no assertion, to feign no quality or
 content there but to permit only the "It is" in which we 
 pretend to no
 affirmation of non-existent attribute: there is an ignorant praise
 which, missing the true description, drags in qualities beneath the
 real worth and so abases; philosophy must guard against attaching to
 the Supreme what is later and lower: moving above all that order, it
 is the cause and source of all these, and is none of them.
 
 For, once more, the nature of the Good is not such as to make it
 all things or a thing among all: that would range it under the same
 classification with them all and it would differ, thus, only by its
 individual quality, some specialty, some addition. At once it
 becomes not a unity but a duality; there is one common element not
 good and another element that is good; but a combination so 
 made up of
 good and not good cannot be the purely good, the primarily good; the
 primarily good must be that principle in which the better element
 has more effectively participated and so attained its goodness. Any
 good thing has become so by communion; but that in which it has
 communion is not a thing among the things of the all; therefore the
 Good is not a thing of the All.
 
 Since there is this Good in any good thing- the specific
 difference by which the combination becomes good- it must enter from
 elsewhere than the world of things: that source must be a Good
 absolute and isolated.
 
 Thus is revealed to us the Primarily existent, the Good, 
 above all
 that has being, good unalloyed, containing nothing in itself,
 utterly unmingling, all-transcending, cause of all.
 
 Certainly neither Being nor Beauty springs from evil or from the
 neutral; the maker, as the more consummate, must surpass the made.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SIXTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 THAT THE PRINCIPLE TRANSCENDING BEING HAS
 
 NO INTELLECTUAL ACT. WHAT BEING HAS
 
 INTELLECTION PRIMALLY AND WHAT
 
 BEING HAS IT SECONDARILY.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. There is a principle having intellection of the external and
 another having self-intellection and thus further removed from
 duality.
 
 Even the first mentioned is not without an effort 
 towards the pure
 unity of which it is not so capable: it does actually contain its
 object, though as something other than itself.
 
 In the self-intellective, there is not even this distinction of
 being: self-conversing, the subject is its own object, and thus
 takes the double form while remaining essentially a unity. The
 intellection is the more profound for this internal possession of
 the object.
 
 This principle is the primally intellective since there can be
 no intellection without duality in unity. If there is no unity,
 perceiving principle and perceived object will be different, and the
 intellection, therefore, not primal: a principle concerned with
 something external cannot be the primally intellective since it does
 not possess the object as integrally its own or as itself; if it
 does possess the object as itself- the condition of true 
 intellection-
 the two are one. Thus [in order to primal intellection] there must
 be a unity in duality, while a pure unity with no counterbalancing
 duality can have no object for its intellection and ceases to be
 intellective: in other words the primally intellective must 
 be at once
 simplex and something else.
 
 But the surest way of realizing that its nature demands this
 combination of unity and duality is to proceed upwards from the
 Soul, where the distinction can be made more dearly since the
 duality is exhibited more obviously.
 
 We can imagine the Soul as a double light, a lesser
 corresponding to the soul proper, a purer representing its
 intellective phase; if now we suppose this intellective 
 light equal to
 the light which is to be its object, we no longer distinguish
 between them; the two are recognised as one: we know, indeed, that
 there are two, but as we see them they have become one: this gives
 us the relation between the intellective subject and the object of
 intellection [in the duality and unity required by that primal
 intellection]: in our thought we have made the two into one; but on
 the other hand the one thing has become two, making itself into a
 duality at the moment of intellection, or, to be more exact, being
 dual by the fact of intellection and single by the fact that its
 intellectual object is itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Thus there is the primally intellective and there is that in
 which intellection has taken another mode; but this indicates that
 what transcends the primarily intellective has no intellection; for,
 to have intellection, it must become an Intellectual-Principle, and,
 if it is to become that, it must possess an intellectual object and,
 as primarily intellective, it must possess that intellectual 
 object as
 something within itself.
 
 But it is not inevitable that every intellectual object should
 both possess the intellective principle in itself and exercise
 intellection: at that, it would be not merely object but subject as
 well and, besides, being thus dual, could not be primal: further,
 the intellectual principle that is to possess the intellectual
 object could not cohere unless there existed an essence purely
 intellectual, something which, while standing as intellectual object
 to the intellectual principle, is in its own essence neither an
 agent nor an object of intellection. The intellectual object 
 points to
 something beyond itself [to a percipient]; and the intellectual
 agent has its intellection in vain unless by seizing and holding an
 object- since, failing that, it can have no intellection but is
 consummated only when it possesses itself of its natural term.
 
 There must have been something standing consummate independently
 of any intellectual act, something perfect in its own essence: thus
 that in which this completion is inherent must exist before
 intellection; in other words it has no need of intellection, having
 been always self-sufficing: this, then, will have no 
 intellectual act.
 
 Thus we arrive at: a principle having no intellection, a 
 principle
 having intellection primarily, a principle having it secondarily.
 
 It may be added that, supposing The First to be intellective, it
 thereby possesses something [some object, some attribute]: at once
 it ceases to be a first; it is a secondary, and not even a unity; it
 is a many; it is all of which it takes intellectual possession; even
 though its intellection fell solely upon its own content, it must
 still be a manifold.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. We may be told that nothing prevents an identity being thus
 multiple. But there must be a unity underlying the aggregate: a
 manifold is impossible without a unity for its source or 
 ground, or at
 least, failing some unity, related or unrelated. This unity must be
 numbered as first before all and can be apprehended only as solitary
 and self-existent.
 
 When we recognize it, resident among the mass of things, our
 business is to see it for what it is- present to the items but
 essentially distinguished from them- and, while not denying it
 there, to seek this underly of all no longer as it appears in those
 other things but as it stands in its pure identity by itself. The
 identity resident in the rest of things is no doubt close to 
 authentic
 identity but cannot be it; and, if the identity of unity is to be
 displayed beyond itself, it must also exist within itself alone.
 
 It may be suggested that its existence takes substantial 
 form only
 by its being resident among outside things: but, at this, it 
 is itself
 no longer simplex nor could any coherence of manifolds occur. On the
 one hand things could take substantial existence only if they were
 in their own virtue simplex. On the other hand, failing a 
 simplex, the
 aggregate of multiples is itself impossible: for the simplex
 individual thing could not exist if there were no simplex unity
 independent of the individual, [a principle of identity] and, not
 existing, much less could it enter into composition with any other
 such: it becomes impossible then for the compound universe, the
 aggregate of all, to exist; it would be the coming together of
 things that are not, things not merely lacking an identity of their
 own but utterly non-existent.
 
 Once there is any manifold, there must be a precedent 
 unity: since
 any intellection implies multiplicity in the intellective 
 subject, the
 non-multiple must be without intellection; that non-multiple will be
 the First: intellection and the Intellectual-Principle must be
 characteristic of beings coming later.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. Another consideration is that if The Good [and First] is
 simplex and without need, it can neither need the 
 intellective act nor
 possess what it does not need: it will therefore not have
 intellection. (Interpolation or corruption: It is without 
 intellection
 because, also, it contains no duality.)
 
 Again; an Intellectual-Principle is distinct from The Good and
 takes a certain goodness only by its intellection of The Good.
 
 Yet again: In any dual object there is the unity [the 
 principle of
 identity] side by side with the rest of the thing; an associated
 member cannot be the unity of the two and there must be a
 self-standing unity [within the duality] before this unity of
 members can exist: by the same reasoning there must be also the
 supreme unity entering into no association whatever, something which
 is unity-simplex by its very being, utterly devoid of all 
 that belongs
 to the thing capable of association.
 
 How could anything be present in anything else unless in 
 virtue of
 a source existing independently of association? The simplex [or
 absolute] requires no derivation; but any manifold, or any dual,
 must be dependent.
 
 We may use the figure of, first, light; then, following it, the
 sun; as a third, the orb of the moon taking its light from the sun:
 Soul carries the Intellectual-Principle as something imparted and
 lending the light which makes it essentially intellective;
 Intellectual-Principle carries the light as its own though it is not
 purely the light but is the being into whose very essence the light
 has been received; highest is That which, giving forth the light to
 its sequent, is no other than the pure light itself by whose 
 power the
 Intellectual-Principle takes character.
 
 How can this highest have need of any other? It is not to be
 identified with any of the things that enter into association; the
 self-standing is of a very different order.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. And again: the multiple must be always seeking its identity,
 desiring self-accord and self-awareness: but what scope is there
 within what is an absolute unity in which to move towards 
 its identity
 or at what term may it hope for self-knowing? It holds its 
 identity in
 its very essence and is above consciousness and all intellective
 act. Intellection is not a primal either in the fact of being or in
 the value of being; it is secondary and derived: for there exists
 The Good; and this moves towards itself while its sequent is 
 moved and
 by that movement has its characteristic vision. The intellective act
 may be defined as a movement towards The Good in some being that
 aspires towards it; the effort produces the fact; the two are
 coincident; to see is to have desired to see: hence again the
 Authentic Good has no need of intellection since itself and nothing
 else is its good.
 
 The intellective act is a movement towards the unmoved Good:
 thus the self-intellection in all save the Absolute Good is the
 working of the imaged Good within them: the intellectual principle
 recognises the likeness, sees itself as a good to itself, an 
 object of
 attraction: it grasps at that manifestation of The Good and, in
 holding that, holds self-vision: if the state of goodness is 
 constant,
 it remains constantly self-attractive and self-intellective. The
 self-intellection is not deliberate: it sees itself as an incident
 in its contemplation of The Good; for it sees itself in virtue of
 its Act; and, in all that exists, the Act is towards The Good.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. If this reasoning is valid, The Good has no scope whatever
 for intellection which demands something attractive from outside.
 The Good, then, is without Act. What Act indeed, could be vested in
 Activity's self? No activity has yet again an activity; and whatever
 we may add to such Activities as depend from something else, at
 least we must leave the first Activity of them all, that from which
 all depend, as an uncontaminated identity, one to which no such
 addition can be made.
 
 That primal Activity, then, is not an intellection, for there is
 nothing upon which it could Exercise intellection since it is The
 First; besides, intellection itself does not exercise the 
 intellective
 act; this belongs to some principle in which intellection is vested.
 There is, we repeat, duality in any thinking being; and the First is
 wholly above the dual.
 
 But all this may be made more evident by a clearer recognition
 of the twofold principle at work wherever there is intellection:
 
 When we affirm the reality of the Real Beings and their 
 individual
 identity of being and declare that these Real Beings exist in the
 Intellectual Realm, we do not mean merely that they remain
 unchangeably self-identical by their very essence, as contrasted
 with the fluidity and instability of the sense-realm; the
 sense-realm itself may contain the enduring. No; we mean rather that
 these principles possess, as by their own virtue, the consummate
 fulness of being. The Essence described as the primally existent
 cannot be a shadow cast by Being, but must possess Being entire; and
 Being is entire when it holds the form and idea of 
 intellection and of
 life. In a Being, then, the existence, the intellection, the life
 are present as an aggregate. When a thing is a Being, it is also an
 Intellectual-Principle, when it is an Intellectual-Principle it is a
 Being; intellection and Being are co-existents. Therefore 
 intellection
 is a multiple not a unitary and that which does not belong to this
 order can have no Intellection. And if we turn to the partial and
 particular, there is the Intellectual form of man, and there is man,
 there is the Intellectual form of horse and there is horse, the
 Intellectual form of Justice, and Justice.
 
 Thus all is dual: the unit is a duality and yet again the dual
 reverts to unity.
 
 That, however, which stands outside all this category can be
 neither an individual unity nor an aggregate of all the duals or in
 any way a duality. How the duals rose from The One is treated
 elsewhere.
 
 What stands above Being stands above intellection: it is no
 weakness in it not to know itself, since as pure unity it contains
 nothing which it needs to explore. But it need not even spend any
 knowing upon things outside itself: this which was always the Good
 of all gives them something greater and better than its knowledge of
 them in giving them in their own identity to cling, in whatever
 measure be possible, to a principle thus lofty.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SEVENTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 IS THERE AN IDEAL ARCHETYPE OF
 
 PARTICULAR BEINGS?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. We have to examine the question whether there exists an ideal
 archetype of individuals, in other words whether I and every other
 human being go back to the Intellectual, every [living] thing having
 origin and principle There.
 
 If Socrates, Socrates' soul, is external then the Authentic
 Socrates- to adapt the term- must be There; that is to say, the
 individual soul has an existence in the Supreme as well as in this
 world. If there is no such permanent endurance and what was Socrates
 may with change of time become another soul and be Pythagoras or
 someone else- then the individual Socrates has not that existence in
 the Divine.
 
 But if the Soul of the individual contains the Reason-Principles
 of all that it traverses, once more all men have their [archetypic]
 existence There: and it is our doctrine that every soul contains all
 the Reason-Principles that exist in the Kosmos: since then the
 Kosmos contains the Reason-Principles not merely of man, but also of
 all individual living things, so must the Soul. Its content of
 Reason-Principles, then, must be limitless, unless there be a
 periodical renovation bounding the boundlessness by the return of a
 former series.
 
 But if [in virtue of this periodic return] each archetype may be
 reproduced by numerous existents, what need is there that there be
 distinct Reason-Principles and archetypes for each existent 
 in any one
 period? Might not one [archetypal] man suffice for all, and
 similarly a limited number of souls produce a limitless 
 number of men?
 
 No: one Reason-Principle cannot account for distinct and 
 differing
 individuals: one human being does not suffice as the 
 exemplar for many
 distinct each from the other not merely in material constituents but
 by innumerable variations of ideal type: this is no question of
 various pictures or images reproducing an original Socrates; the
 beings produced differ so greatly as to demand distinct
 Reason-Principles. The entire soul-period conveys with it all the
 requisite Reason-Principles, and so too the same existents 
 appear once
 more under their action.
 
 There is no need to baulk at this limitlessness in the
 Intellectual; it is an infinitude having nothing to do with number
 or part; what we may think of it as its outgoing is no other than
 its characteristic Act.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. But individuals are brought into being by the union of the
 Reason-Principles of the parents, male and female: this seems to do
 away with a definite Reason-Principle for each of the offspring: one
 of the parents- the male let us say- is the source; and the
 offspring is determined not by Reason-Principles differing from
 child to child but by one only, the father's or that of the father's
 father.
 
 No: a distinct Reason-Principle may be the determinant for the
 child since the parent contains all: they would become effective at
 different times.
 
 And so of the differences among children of the same parents: it
 is a matter of varying dominance: either the offspring- whether it
 so appears or not- has been mainly determined by, now, the male,
 now, the female or, while each principle has given itself entire and
 lies there within, yet it effectively moulds one portion of 
 the bodily
 substance rather than another.
 
 And how [by the theory of a divine archetype of each individual]
 are the differences caused by place to be explained?
 
 Is the differentiating element to be found in the varying
 resistance of the material of the body?
 
 No: if this were so, all men with the exception of one only
 would be untrue to nature.
 
 Difference everywhere is a good, and so there must be differing
 archetypes, though only to evil could be attribute any power 
 in Matter
 to thwart nature by overmastering the perfect Reason-Principles,
 hidden but given, all.
 
 Still, admitting the diversity of the Reason-principles, why
 need there by as many as there are men born in each Period, 
 once it is
 granted that different beings may take external manifestation under
 the presence of the same principles?
 
 Under the presence of all; agreed: but with the dominance of the
 very same? That is still open to question.
 
 May we not take it that there may be identical reproduction from
 one Period to another but not in the same Period?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. In the case of twin birth among human beings how can we make
 out the Reason-Principles to be different; and still more 
 when we turn
 to the animals and especially those with litters?
 
 Where the young are precisely alike, there is one
 Reason-Principle.
 
 But this would mean that after all there are not as many Reason
 Principles as separate beings?
 
 As many as there are of differing beings, differing by something
 more than a mere failure in complete reproduction of their Idea.
 
 And why may not this [sharing of archetype] occur also in beings
 untouched by differentiation, if indeed there be any such?
 
 A craftsman even in constructing an object identical with a
 model must envisage that identity in a mental 
 differentiation enabling
 him to make a second thing by bringing in some difference 
 side by side
 with the identity: similarly in nature, where the thing comes about
 not by reasoning but in sole virtue of Reason-Principles, that
 differentiation must be included in the archetypal idea, though it
 is not in our power to perceive the difference.
 
 The consideration of Quantity brings the same result:
 
 If production is undetermined in regard to Quantity, each thing
 has its distinct Reason-Principle: if there is a measured system the
 Quantity has been determined by the unrolling and unfolding of the
 Reason-Principles of all the existences.
 
 Thus when the universe has reached its term, there will 
 be a fresh
 beginning, since the entire Quantity which the Kosmos is to exhibit,
 every item that is to emerge in its course, all is laid up from the
 first in the Being that contains the Reason-Principles.
 
 Are we, then, looking to the brute realm, to hold that there are
 as many Reason-Principles as distinct creatures born in a litter?
 
 Why not? There is nothing alarming about such limitlessness in
 generative forces and in Reason-Principles, when Soul is there to
 sustain all.
 
 As in Soul [principle of Life] so in Divine Mind [principle of
 Idea] there is this infinitude of recurring generative powers; the
 Beings there are unfailing.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 EIGHTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON THE INTELLECTUAL BEAUTY.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. It is a principle with us that one who has attained to the
 vision of the Intellectual Beauty and grasped the beauty of the
 Authentic Intellect will be able also to come to understand 
 the Father
 and Transcendent of that Divine Being. It concerns us, then, 
 to try to
 see and say, for ourselves and as far as such matters may be 
 told, how
 the Beauty of the divine Intellect and of the Intellectual Kosmos
 may be revealed to contemplation.
 
 Let us go to the realm of magnitudes: Suppose two blocks of
 stone lying side by side: one is unpatterned, quite untouched by
 art; the other has been minutely wrought by the craftsman's 
 hands into
 some statue of god or man, a Grace or a Muse, or if a human 
 being, not
 a portrait but a creation in which the sculptor's art has 
 concentrated
 all loveliness.
 
 Now it must be seen that the stone thus brought under 
 the artist's
 hand to the beauty of form is beautiful not as stone- for so 
 the crude
 block would be as pleasant- but in virtue of the form or idea
 introduced by the art. This form is not in the material; it is in
 the designer before ever it enters the stone; and the artificer
 holds it not by his equipment of eyes and hands but by his
 participation in his art. The beauty, therefore, exists in a far
 higher state in the art; for it does not come over 
 integrally into the
 work; that original beauty is not transferred; what comes over is a
 derivative and a minor: and even that shows itself upon the 
 statue not
 integrally and with entire realization of intention but only 
 in so far
 as it has subdued the resistance of the material.
 
 Art, then, creating in the image of its own nature and content,
 and working by the Idea or Reason-Principle of the beautiful 
 object it
 is to produce, must itself be beautiful in a far higher and purer
 degree since it is the seat and source of that beauty, indwelling in
 the art, which must naturally be more complete than any comeliness
 of the external. In the degree in which the beauty is diffused by
 entering into matter, it is so much the weaker than that
 concentrated in unity; everything that reaches outwards is the less
 for it, strength less strong, heat less hot, every power less
 potent, and so beauty less beautiful.
 
 Then again every prime cause must be, within itself, 
 more powerful
 than its effect can be: the musical does not derive from an
 unmusical source but from music; and so the art exhibited in the
 material work derives from an art yet higher.
 
 Still the arts are not to be slighted on the ground that they
 create by imitation of natural objects; for, to begin with, these
 natural objects are themselves imitations; then, we must recognise
 that they give no bare reproduction of the thing seen but go back to
 the Ideas from which Nature itself derives, and, furthermore, that
 much of their work is all their own; they are holders of beauty and
 add where nature is lacking. Thus Pheidias wrought the Zeus upon no
 model among things of sense but by apprehending what form Zeus must
 take if he chose to become manifest to sight.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. But let us leave the arts and consider those works produced
 by Nature and admitted to be naturally beautiful which the creations
 of art are charged with imitating, all reasoning life and
 unreasoning things alike, but especially the consummate among them,
 where the moulder and maker has subdued the material and given the
 form he desired. Now what is the beauty here? It has nothing to do
 with the blood or the menstrual process: either there is 
 also a colour
 and form apart from all this, or there is nothing unless sheer
 ugliness or a bare recipient, as it were the mere Matter of beauty.
 
 Whence shone forth the beauty of Helen, battle-sought; or of all
 those women like in loveliness to Aphrodite; or of Aphrodite
 herself; or of any human being that has been perfect in beauty; or
 of any of these gods manifest to sight, or unseen but carrying what
 would be beauty if we saw?
 
 In all these is it not the Idea, something of that realm but
 communicated to the produced from within the producer just 
 as in works
 of art, we held, it is communicated from the arts to their
 creations? Now we can surely not believe that, while the made thing
 and the Idea thus impressed upon Matter are beautiful, yet the Idea
 not so alloyed but resting still with the creator- the Idea primal,
 immaterial, firmly a unity- is not Beauty.
 
 If material extension were in itself the ground of beauty, then
 the creating principle, being without extension, could not be
 beautiful: but beauty cannot be made to depend upon magnitude since,
 whether in a large object or a small, the one Idea equally moves and
 forms the mind by its inherent power. A further indication is that
 as long as the object remains outside us we know nothing of it; it
 affects us by entry; but only as an Idea can it enter 
 through the eyes
 which are not of scope to take an extended mass: we are, no doubt,
 simultaneously possessed of the magnitude which, however, we take in
 not as mass but by an elaboration upon the presented form.
 
 Then again the principle producing the beauty must be, itself,
 ugly, neutral or beautiful: ugly, it could not produce the opposite;
 neutral, why should its product be the one rather than the other?
 The Nature, then, which creates things so lovely must be itself of a
 far earlier beauty; we, undisciplined in discernment of the inward,
 knowing nothing of it, run after the outer, never understanding that
 it is the inner which stirs us; we are in the case of one 
 who sees his
 own reflection but not realizing whence it comes goes in pursuit of
 it.
 
 But that the thing we are pursuing is something 
 different and that
 the beauty is not in the concrete object is manifest from the beauty
 there is in matters of study, in conduct and custom; briefly in soul
 or mind. And it is precisely here that the greater beauty lies,
 perceived whenever you look to the wisdom in a man and delight in
 it, not wasting attention on the face, which may be hideous, but
 passing all appearance by and catching only at the inner comeliness,
 the truly personal; if you are still unmoved and cannot acknowledge
 beauty under such conditions, then looking to your own inner 
 being you
 will find no beauty to delight you and it will be futile in 
 that state
 to seek the greater vision, for you will be questing it through the
 ugly and impure.
 
 This is why such matters are not spoken of to everyone; you, if
 you are conscious of beauty within, remember.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. Thus there is in the Nature-Principle itself an Ideal 
 archetype
 of the beauty that is found in material forms and, of that archetype
 again, the still more beautiful archetype in Soul, source of that in
 Nature. In the proficient soul this is brighter and of more advanced
 loveliness: adorning the soul and bringing to it a light from that
 greater light which is beauty primally, its immediate presence sets
 the soul reflecting upon the quality of this prior, the archetype
 which has no such entries, and is present nowhere but remains in
 itself alone, and thus is not even to be called a 
 Reason-Principle but
 is the creative source of the very first Reason-Principle 
 which is the
 Beauty to which Soul serves as Matter.
 
 This prior, then, is the Intellectual-Principle, the veritable,
 abiding and not fluctuant since not taking intellectual quality from
 outside itself. By what image thus, can we represent it? We have
 nowhere to go but to what is less. Only from itself can we take an
 image of it; that is, there can be no representation of it, except
 in the sense that we represent gold by some portion of gold- 
 purified,
 either actually or mentally, if it be impure- insisting at the same
 time that this is not the total thing-gold, but merely the
 particular gold of a particular parcel. In the same way we learn in
 this matter from the purified Intellect in ourselves or, if you
 like, from the Gods and the glory of the Intellect in them.
 
 For assuredly all the Gods are august and beautiful in a beauty
 beyond our speech. And what makes them so? Intellect; and especially
 Intellect operating within them [the divine sun and stars] to
 visibility. It is not through the loveliness of their 
 corporeal forms:
 even those that have body are not gods by that beauty; it is 
 in virtue
 of Intellect that they, too, are gods, and as gods beautiful. They
 do not veer between wisdom and folly: in the immunity of Intellect
 unmoving and pure, they are wise always, all-knowing, taking
 cognisance not of the human but of their own being and of all that
 lies within the contemplation of Intellect. Those of them whose
 dwelling is in the heavens, are ever in this meditation- what task
 prevents them?- and from afar they look, too, into that 
 further heaven
 by a lifting of the head. The Gods belonging to that higher Heaven
 itself, they whose station is upon it and in it, see and know in
 virtue of their omnipresence to it. For all There is heaven; earth
 is heaven, and sea heaven; and animal and plant and man; all is the
 heavenly content of that heaven: and the Gods in it, 
 despising neither
 men nor anything else that is there where all is of the heavenly
 order, traverse all that country and all space in peace.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. To "live at ease" is There; and, to these divine 
 beings, verity
 is mother and nurse, existence and sustenance; all that is not of
 process but of authentic being they see, and themselves in all: for
 all is transparent, nothing dark, nothing resistant; every being is
 lucid to every other, in breadth and depth; light runs through
 light. And each of them contains all within itself, and at the same
 time sees all in every other, so that everywhere there is 
 all, and all
 is all and each all, and infinite the glory. Each of them is great;
 the small is great; the sun, There, is all the stars; and every
 star, again, is all the stars and sun. While some one manner of
 being is dominant in each, all are mirrored in every other.
 
 Movement There is pure [as self-caused] for the moving principle
 is not a separate thing to complicate it as it speeds.
 
 So, too, Repose is not troubled, for there is no admixture of
 the unstable; and the Beauty is all beauty since it is not merely
 resident [as an attribute or addition] in some beautiful object.
 Each There walks upon no alien soil; its place is its essential
 self; and, as each moves, so to speak, towards what is Above, it is
 attended by the very ground from which it starts: there is no
 distinguishing between the Being and the Place; all is Intellect,
 the Principle and the ground on which it stands, alike. Thus we
 might think that our visible sky [the ground or place of the stars],
 lit, as it is, produces the light which reaches us from it, though
 of course this is really produced by the stars [as it were, by the
 Principles of light alone, not also by the ground as the 
 analogy would
 require].
 
 In our realm all is part rising from part and nothing can be
 more than partial; but There each being is an eternal product of a
 whole and is at once a whole and an individual manifesting as part
 but, to the keen vision There, known for the whole it is.
 
 The myth of Lynceus seeing into the very deeps of the earth
 tells us of those eyes in the divine. No weariness overtakes this
 vision, which yet brings no such satiety as would call for 
 its ending;
 for there never was a void to be filled so that, with the fulness
 and the attainment of purpose, the sense of sufficiency be induced:
 nor is there any such incongruity within the divine that one Being
 there could be repulsive to another: and of course all There are
 unchangeable. This absence of satisfaction means only a satisfaction
 leading to no distaste for that which produces it; to see is to look
 the more, since for them to continue in the contemplation of an
 infinite self and of infinite objects is but to acquiesce in the
 bidding of their nature.
 
 Life, pure, is never a burden; how then could there be weariness
 There where the living is most noble? That very life is wisdom, not
 a wisdom built up by reasonings but complete from the beginning,
 suffering no lack which could set it enquiring, a wisdom primal,
 unborrowed, not something added to the Being, but its very 
 essence. No
 wisdom, thus, is greater; this is the authentic knowing, assessor to
 the divine Intellect as projected into manifestation simultaneously
 with it; thus, in the symbolic saying, Justice is assessor to Zeus.
 
 [Perfect wisdom] for all the Principles of this order, dwelling
 There, are as it were visible images protected from themselves, so
 that all becomes an object of contemplation to contemplators
 immeasurably blessed. The greatness and power of the wisdom There we
 may know from this, that is embraces all the real Beings, 
 and has made
 all, and all follow it, and yet that it is itself those beings,
 which sprang into being with it, so that all is one, and the essence
 There is wisdom. If we have failed to understand, it is that we have
 thought of knowledge as a mass of theorems and an accumulation of
 propositions, though that is false even for our sciences of the
 sense-realm. But in case this should be questioned, we may leave our
 own sciences for the present, and deal with the knowing in 
 the Supreme
 at which Plato glances where he speaks of "that knowledge 
 which is not
 a stranger in something strange to it"- though in what sense, he
 leaves us to examine and declare, if we boast ourselves worthy of
 the discussion. This is probably our best starting-point.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. All that comes to be, work of nature or of craft, some wisdom
 has made: everywhere a wisdom presides at a making.
 
 No doubt the wisdom of the artist may be the guide of 
 the work; it
 is sufficient explanation of the wisdom exhibited in the 
 arts; but the
 artist himself goes back, after all, to that wisdom in 
 Nature which is
 embodied in himself; and this is not a wisdom built up of 
 theorems but
 one totality, not a wisdom consisting of manifold detail
 co-ordinated into a unity but rather a unity working out into detail.
 
 Now, if we could think of this as the primal wisdom, we need
 look no further, since, at that, we have discovered a principle
 which is neither a derivative nor a "stranger in something strange
 to it." But if we are told that, while this Reason-Principle is in
 Nature, yet Nature itself is its source, we ask how Nature came to
 possess it; and, if Nature derived it from some other source, we ask
 what that other source may be; if, on the contrary, the principle is
 self-sprung, we need look no further: but if we are referred to the
 Intellectual-Principle we must make clear whether the
 Intellectual-Principle engendered the wisdom: if we learn 
 that it did,
 we ask whence: if from itself, then inevitably, it is itself Wisdom.
 
 The true Wisdom, then [found to be identical with the
 Intellectual-Principle] is Real Being; and Real Being is 
 Wisdom; it is
 wisdom that gives value to Real Being; and Being is Real in virtue
 of its origin in wisdom. It follows that all forms of existence not
 possessing wisdom are, indeed, Beings in right of the wisdom which
 went to their forming but, as not in themselves possessing 
 it, are not
 Real Beings.
 
 We cannot therefore think that the divine Beings of that sphere,
 or the other supremely blessed There, need look to our apparatus of
 science: all of that realm, all is noble image, such images as we
 may conceive to lie within the soul of the wise- but There not as
 inscription but as authentic existence. The ancients had this in
 mind when they declared the Ideas to be Beings, Essentials.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. Similarly, as it seems to me, the wise of Egypt- whether in
 precise knowledge or by a prompting of nature- indicated the truth
 where, in their effort towards philosophical statement, they left
 aside the writing-forms that take in the detail of words and
 sentences- those characters that represent sounds and convey the
 propositions of reasoning- and drew pictures instead, 
 engraving in the
 temple- inscriptions a separate image for every separate item: thus
 they exhibited the mode in which the Supreme goes forth.
 
 For each manifestation of knowledge and wisdom is a distinct
 image, an object in itself, an immediate unity, not as aggregate of
 discursive reasoning and detailed willing. Later from this wisdom in
 unity there appears, in another form of being, an image, already
 less compact, which announces the original in an outward stage and
 seeks the causes by which things are such that the wonder rises how
 a generated world can be so excellent.
 
 For, one who knows must declare his wonder that this 
 Wisdom, while
 not itself containing the causes by which Being exists and takes
 such excellence, yet imparts them to the entities produced in
 Being's realm. This excellence whose necessity is scarcely or not at
 all manifest to search, exists, if we could but find it out, before
 all searching and reasoning.
 
 What I say may be considered in one chief thing, and thence
 applied to all the particular entities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Consider the universe: we are agreed that its 
 existence and its
 nature come to it from beyond itself; are we, now, to 
 imagine that its
 maker first thought it out in detail- the earth, and its necessary
 situation in the middle; water and, again, its position as lying
 upon the earth; all the other elements and objects up to the sky in
 due place and order; living beings with their appropriate forms as
 we know them, their inner organs and their outer limbs- and that
 having thus appointed every item beforehand, he then set about the
 execution?
 
 Such designing was not even possible; how could the plan for a
 universe come to one that had never looked outward? Nor could he
 work on material gathered from elsewhere as our craftsmen do, using
 hands and tools; feet and hands are of the later order.
 
 One way, only, remains: all things must exist in something else;
 of that prior- since there is no obstacle, all being 
 continuous within
 the realm of reality- there has suddenly appeared a sign, an image,
 whether given forth directly or through the ministry of soul or of
 some phase of soul, matters nothing for the moment: thus the entire
 aggregate of existence springs from the divine world, in greater
 beauty There because There unmingled but mingled here.
 
 From the beginning to end all is gripped by the Forms of the
 Intellectual Realm: Matter itself is held by the Ideas of 
 the elements
 and to these Ideas are added other Ideas and others again, so that
 it is hard to work down to crude Matter beneath all that sheathing
 of Idea. Indeed since Matter itself is in its degree, an Idea- the
 lowest- all this universe is Idea and there is nothing that is not
 Idea as the archetype was. And all is made silently, since 
 nothing had
 part in the making but Being and Idea further reason why 
 creation went
 without toil. The Exemplar was the Idea of an All, and so an All
 must come into being.
 
 Thus nothing stood in the way of the Idea, and even now it
 dominates, despite all the clash of things: the creation is not
 hindered on its way even now; it stands firm in virtue of being All.
 To me, moreover, it seems that if we ourselves were 
 archetypes, Ideas,
 veritable Being, and the Idea with which we construct here were our
 veritable Essence, then our creative power too would 
 toillessly effect
 its purpose: as man now stands, he does not produce in his 
 work a true
 image of himself: become man, he has ceased to be the All: ceasing
 to be man- we read- "he soars aloft and administers the Kosmos
 entire"; restored to the All he is maker of the All.
 
 But- to our immediate purpose- it is possible to give a 
 reason why
 the earth is set in the midst and why it is round and why 
 the ecliptic
 runs precisely as it does, but, looking to the creating principle,
 we cannot say that because this was the way therefore things were so
 planned: we can say only that because the All is what it is, 
 therefore
 there is a total of good; the causing principle, we might put it,
 reached the conclusion before all formal reasoning and not from any
 premises, not by sequence or plan but before either, since 
 all of that
 order is later, all reason, demonstration, persuasion.
 
 Since there is a Source, all the created must spring from it and
 in accordance with it; and we are rightly told not to go seeking the
 causes impelling a Source to produce, especially when this is the
 perfectly sufficient Source and identical with the Term: a Source
 which is Source and Term must be the All-Unity, complete in itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. This then is Beauty primally: it is entire and omnipresent as
 an entirety; and therefore in none of its parts or members lacking
 in beauty; beautiful thus beyond denial. Certainly it cannot be
 anything [be, for example, Beauty] without being wholly that 
 thing; it
 can be nothing which it is to possess partially or in which 
 it utterly
 fails [and therefore it must entirely be Beauty entire].
 
 If this principle were not beautiful, what other could be? Its
 prior does not deign to be beautiful; that which is the first to
 manifest itself- Form and object of vision to the intellect- cannot
 but be lovely to see. It is to indicate this that Plato, drawing on
 something well within our observation, represents the Creator as
 approving the work he has achieved: the intention is to make us feel
 the lovable beauty of the autotype and of the Divine Idea; for to
 admire a representation is to admire the original upon which it was
 made.
 
 It is not surprising if we fail to  recognise what is passing
 within us: lovers, and those in general that admire beauty here, do
 not stay to reflect that it is to be traced, as of course it must
 be, to the Beauty There. That the admiration of the Demiurge is to
 be referred to the Ideal Exemplar is deliberately made evident by
 the rest of the passage: "He admired; and determined to 
 bring the work
 into still closer likeness with the Exemplar": he makes us feel the
 magnificent beauty of the Exemplar by telling us that the Beauty
 sprung from this world is, itself, a copy from That.
 
 And indeed if the divine did not exist, the transcendently
 beautiful, in a beauty beyond all thought, what could be 
 lovelier than
 the things we see? Certainly no reproach can rightly be brought
 against this world save only that it is not That.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. Let us, then, make a mental picture of our universe: each
 member shall remain what it is, distinctly apart; yet all is to
 form, as far as possible, a complete unity so that whatever 
 comes into
 view shall show as if it were the surface of the orb over all,
 bringing immediately with it the vision, on the one plane, of the
 sun and of all the stars with earth and sea and all living things as
 if exhibited upon a transparent globe.
 
 Bring this vision actually before your sight, so that there
 shall be in your mind the gleaming representation of a sphere, a
 picture holding sprung, themselves, of that universe and repose or
 some at rest, some in motion. Keep this sphere before you, 
 and from it
 imagine another, a sphere stripped of magnitude and of spatial
 differences; cast out your inborn sense of Matter, taking care not
 merely to attenuate it: call on God, maker of the sphere whose image
 you now hold, and pray Him to enter. And may He come bringing His
 own Universe with all the Gods that dwell in it- He who is 
 the one God
 and all the gods, where each is all, blending into a unity, distinct
 in powers but all one god in virtue of that one divine power of many
 facets.
 
 More truly, this is the one God who is all the gods; for, in the
 coming to be of all those, this, the one, has suffered no 
 diminishing.
 He and all have one existence while each again is distinct. It is
 distinction by state without interval: there is no outward 
 form to set
 one here and another there and to prevent any from being an entire
 identity; yet there is no sharing of parts from one to 
 another. Nor is
 each of those divine wholes a power in fragment, a power totalling
 to the sum of the measurable segments: the divine is one all-power,
 reaching out to infinity, powerful to infinity; and so great is God
 that his very members are infinites. What place can be named to
 which He does not reach?
 
 Great, too, is this firmament of ours and all the powers
 constellated within it, but it would be greater still, unspeakably,
 but that there is inbound in it something of the petty power of
 body; no doubt the powers of fire and other bodily substances might
 themselves be thought very great, but in fact, it is through their
 failure in the true power that we see them burning, destroying,
 wearing things away, and slaving towards the production of life;
 they destroy because they are themselves in process of destruction,
 and they produce because they belong to the realm of the produced.
 
 The power in that other world has merely Being and Beauty of
 Being. Beauty without Being could not be, nor Being voided of
 Beauty: abandoned of Beauty, Being loses something of its essence.
 Being is desirable because it is identical with Beauty; and Beauty
 is loved because it is Being. How then can we debate which is the
 cause of the other, where the nature is one? The very 
 figment of Being
 needs some imposed image of Beauty to make it passable and even to
 ensure its existence; it exists to the degree in which it has taken
 some share in the beauty of Idea; and the more deeply it has drawn
 on this, the less imperfect it is, precisely because the nature
 which is essentially the beautiful has entered into it the more
 intimately.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. This is why Zeus, although the oldest of the gods and their
 sovereign, advances first [in the Phaidros myth] towards that
 vision, followed by gods and demigods and such souls as are of
 strength to see. That Being appears before them from some 
 unseen place
 and rising loftily over them pours its light upon all things, so
 that all gleams in its radiance; it upholds some beings, and 
 they see;
 the lower are dazzled and turn away, unfit to gaze upon that sun,
 the trouble falling the more heavily on those most remote.
 
 Of those looking upon that Being and its content, and 
 able to see,
 all take something but not all the same vision always: intently
 gazing, one sees the fount and principle of Justice, another 
 is filled
 with the sight of Moral Wisdom, the original of that quality 
 as found,
 sometimes at least, among men, copied by them in their 
 degree from the
 divine virtue which, covering all the expanse, so to speak, of the
 Intellectual Realm is seen, last attainment of all, by those who
 have known already many splendid visions.
 
 The gods see, each singly and all as one. So, too, the 
 souls; they
 see all There in right of being sprung, themselves, of that universe
 and therefore including all from beginning to end and having their
 existence There if only by that phase which belongs inherently to
 the Divine, though often too they are There entire, those of 
 them that
 have not incurred separation.
 
 This vision Zeus takes, and it is for such of us, also, as share
 his love and appropriate our part in the Beauty There, the final
 object of all seeing, the entire beauty upon all things; for 
 all There
 sheds radiance, and floods those that have found their way thither
 so that they too become beautiful; thus it will often happen that
 men climbing heights where the soil has taken a yellow glow will
 themselves appear so, borrowing colour from the place on which they
 move. The colour flowering on that other height we speak of 
 is Beauty;
 or rather all There is light and beauty, through and through, for
 the beauty is no mere bloom upon the surface.
 
 To those that do not see entire, the immediate 
 impression is alone
 taken into account; but those drunken with this wine, filled with
 the nectar, all their soul penetrated by this beauty, cannot remain
 mere gazers: no longer is there a spectator outside gazing on an
 outside spectacle; the clear-eyed hold the vision within themselves,
 though, for the most part, they have no idea that it is within but
 look towards it as to something beyond them and see it as an 
 object of
 vision caught by a direction of the will.
 
 All that one sees as a spectacle is still external; one 
 must bring
 the vision within and see no longer in that mode of separation but
 as we know ourselves; thus a man filled with a god- possessed by
 Apollo or by one of the Muses- need no longer look outside for his
 vision of the divine being; it is but finding the strength to see
 divinity within.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. Similarly any one, unable to see himself, but possessed by
 that God, has but to bring that divine- within before his
 consciousness and at once he sees an image of himself, himself
 lifted to a better beauty: now let him ignore that image, lovely
 though it is, and sink into a perfect self-identity, no such
 separation remaining; at once he forms a multiple unity with the God
 silently present; in the degree of his power and will, the two
 become one; should he turn back to the former duality, still he is
 pure and remains very near to the God; he has but to look again and
 the same presence is there.
 
 This conversion brings gain: at the first stage, that of
 separation, a man is aware of self; but, retreating inwards, he
 becomes possessor of all; he puts sense away behind him in dread of
 the separated life and becomes one in the Divine; if he plans to see
 in separation, he sets himself outside.
 
 The novice must hold himself constantly under some image of the
 Divine Being and seek in the light of a clear conception; knowing
 thus, in a deep conviction, whither he is going- into what a 
 sublimity
 he penetrates- he must give himself forthwith to the inner and,
 radiant with the Divine Intellections [with which he is now one], be
 no longer the seer but, as that place has made him, the seen.
 
 Still, we will be told, one cannot be in beauty and yet fail to
 see it. The very contrary: to see the divine as something external
 is to be outside of it; to become it is to be most truly in beauty:
 since sight deals with the external, there can here be no vision
 unless in the sense of identification with the object.
 
 And this identification amounts to a self-knowing, a
 self-consciousness, guarded by the fear of losing the self in the
 desire of a too wide awareness.
 
 It must be remembered that sensations of the ugly and 
 evil impress
 us more violently than those of what is agreeable and yet leave less
 knowledge as the residue of the shock: sickness makes the rougher
 mark, but health, tranquilly present, explains itself 
 better; it takes
 the first place, it is the natural thing, it belongs to our being;
 illness is alien, unnatural and thus makes itself felt by its very
 incongruity, while the other conditions are native and we take no
 notice. Such being our nature, we are most completely aware of
 ourselves when we are most completely identified with the object of
 our knowledge.
 
 This is why in that other sphere, when we are deepest in that
 knowledge by intellection, we are aware of none; we are 
 expecting some
 impression on sense, which has nothing to report since it has seen
 nothing and never could in that order see anything. The unbelieving
 element is sense; it is the other, the Intellectual-Principle, that
 sees; and if this too doubted, it could not even credit its own
 existence, for it can never stand away and with bodily eyes
 apprehend itself as a visible object.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. We have told how this vision is to be procured, 
 whether by the
 mode of separation or in identity: now, seen in either way, what
 does it give to report?
 
 The vision has been of God in travail of a beautiful offspring,
 God engendering a universe within himself in a painless labour and-
 rejoiced in what he has brought into being, proud of his children-
 keeping all closely by Him, for pleasure He has in his 
 radiance and in
 theirs.
 
 Of this offspring- all beautiful, but most beautiful those that
 have remained within- only one has become manifest without; from him
 [Zeus, sovereign over the visible universe] the youngest born, we
 may gather, as from some image, the greatness of the Father 
 and of the
 Brothers that remain within the Father's house.
 
 Still the manifested God cannot think that he has come forth in
 vain from the father; for through him another universe has arisen,
 beautiful as the image of beauty, and it could not be' lawful that
 Beauty and Being should fail of a beautiful image.
 
 This second Kosmos at every point copies the archetype: it has
 life and being in copy, and has beauty as springing from that
 diviner world. In its character of image it holds, too, that divine
 perpetuity without which it would only at times be truly
 representative and sometimes fail like a construction of art; for
 every image whose existence lies in the nature of things must stand
 during the entire existence of the archetype.
 
 Hence it is false to put an end to the visible sphere as long as
 the Intellectual endures, or to found it upon a decision taken by
 its maker at some given moment.
 
 That teaching shirks the penetration of such a making as is here
 involved: it fails to see that as long as the Supreme is 
 radiant there
 can be no failing of its sequel but, that existing, all exists. And-
 since the necessity of conveying our meaning compels such terms- the
 Supreme has existed for ever and for ever will exist.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. The God fettered [as in the Kronos Myth] to an unchanging
 identity leaves the ordering of this universe to his son (to Zeus),
 for it could not be in his character to neglect his rule within the
 divine sphere, and, as though sated with the Authentic-Beauty, seek
 a lordship too recent and too poor for his might. Ignoring this
 lower world, Kronos [Intellectual-Principle] claims for his 
 own father
 [Ouranoo, the Absolute, or One] with all the upward-tending between
 them: and he counts all that tends to the inferior, 
 beginning from his
 son [Zeus, the All-Soul], as ranking beneath him. Thus he holds a
 mid position determined on the one side by the 
 differentiation implied
 in the severance from the very highest and, on the other, by that
 which keeps him apart from the link between himself and the lower:
 he stands between a greater father and an inferior son. But 
 since that
 father is too lofty to be thought of under the name of Beauty, the
 second God remains the primally beautiful.
 
 Soul also has beauty, but is less beautiful than Intellect as
 being its image and therefore, though beautiful in nature, taking
 increase of beauty by looking to that original. Since then the
 All-Soul- to use the more familiar term- since Aphrodite 
 herself is so
 beautiful, what name can we give to that other? If Soul is so lovely
 in its own right, of what quality must that prior be? And since its
 being is derived, what must that power be from which the Soul takes
 the double beauty, the borrowed and the inherent?
 
 We ourselves possess beauty when we are true to our own 
 being; our
 ugliness is in going over to another order; our self-knowledge, that
 is to say, is our beauty; in self-ignorance we are ugly.
 
 Thus beauty is of the Divine and comes Thence only.
 
 Do these considerations suffice to a clear understanding of the
 Intellectual Sphere, or must we make yet another attempt by another
 road?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 NINTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 THE INTELLECTUAL-PRINCIPLE, THE IDEAS, AND
 
 THE AUTHENTIC EXISTENCE.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. All human beings from birth onward live to the realm of sense
 more than to the Intellectual.
 
 Forced of necessity to attend first to the material, some of
 them elect to abide by that order and, their life 
 throughout, make its
 concerns their first and their last; the sweet and the 
 bitter of sense
 are their good and evil; they feel they have done all if they live
 along pursuing the one and barring the doors to the other. And those
 of them that pretend to reasoning have adopted this as their
 philosophy; they are like the heavier birds which have incorporated
 much from the earth and are so weighted down that they 
 cannot fly high
 for all the wings Nature has given them.
 
 Others do indeed lift themselves a little above the earth; the
 better in their soul urges them from the pleasant to the nobler, but
 they are not of power to see the highest and so, in despair of any
 surer ground, they fall back in virtue's name, upon those actions
 and options of the lower from which they sought to escape.
 
 But there is a third order- those godlike men who, in their
 mightier power, in the keenness of their sight, have clear vision of
 the splendour above and rise to it from among the cloud and fog of
 earth and hold firmly to that other world, looking beyond all here,
 delighted in the place of reality, their native land, like a man
 returning after long wanderings to the pleasant ways of his own
 country.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. What is this other place and how it is accessible?
 
 It is to be reached by those who, born with the nature of the
 lover, are also authentically philosophic by inherent temper; in
 pain of love towards beauty but not held by material loveliness,
 taking refuge from that in things whose beauty is of the soul- such
 things as virtue, knowledge, institutions, law and custom- 
 and thence,
 rising still a step, reach to the source of this loveliness of the
 Soul, thence to whatever be above that again, until the uttermost is
 reached. The First, the Principle whose beauty is 
 self-springing: this
 attained, there is an end to the pain inassuageable before.
 
 But how is the ascent to be begun? Whence comes the 
 power? In what
 thought is this love to find its guide?
 
 The guiding thought is this: that the beauty perceived 
 on material
 things is borrowed.
 
 The pattern giving beauty to the corporeal rests upon it as Idea
 to its Matter and the substrate may change and from being pleasant
 become distasteful, a sign, in all reason, that the beauty comes by
 participation.
 
 Now, what is this that gives grace to the corporeal?
 
 Two causes in their degree; the participation in beauty and the
 power of Soul, the maker, which has imprinted that form.
 
 We ask then is soul, of itself, a thing of beauty: we find it is
 not since differences are manifest, one Soul wise and lovely,
 another foolish and ugly: soul-beauty is constituted by wisdom.
 
 The question thus becomes, "What principle is the giver of
 wisdom to the soul? and the only answer is "The
 Intellectual-Principle," the veritably intellectual, wise without
 intermission and therefore beautiful of itself.
 
 But does even this suffice for our First?
 
 No; we must look still inward beyond the Intellectual, 
 which, from
 our point of approach, stands before the Supreme Beginning, in whose
 forecourt, as it were, it announces in its own being the entire
 content of the Good, that prior of all, locked in unity, of 
 which this
 is the expression already touched by multiplicity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. We will have to examine this Nature, the Intellectual, which
 our reasoning identifies as the authentically existent and the
 veritable essential: but first we must take another path and make
 certain that such a principle does necessarily exist.
 
 Perhaps it is ridiculous to set out enquiring whether an
 Intellectual-Principle has place in the total of being: but there
 may be some to hesitate even as to this and certainly there will be
 the question whether it is as we describe it, whether it is 
 a separate
 existence, whether it actually is the real beings, whether it is the
 seat of the Ideas; to this we now address ourselves.
 
 All that we see, and describe as having existence, we know to be
 compound; hand-wrought or compacted by nature, nothing is 
 simplex. Now
 the hand-wrought, with its metal or stone or wood, is not 
 realized out
 of these materials until the appropriate craft has produced statue,
 house or bed, by imparting the particular idea from its own content.
 Similarly with natural forms of being; those including several
 constituents, compound bodies as we call them, may be analysed into
 the materials and the Idea imposed upon the total; the human being,
 for example, into soul and body; and the human body into the four
 elements. Finding everything to be a compound of Matter and shaping
 principle- since the Matter of the elements is of itself shapeless-
 you will enquire whence this forming idea comes; and you will ask
 whether in the soul we recognise a simplex or whether this also has
 constituents, something representing Matter and something else- the
 Intellectual-Principle in it- representing Idea, the one 
 corresponding
 to the shape actually on the statue, the other to the artist giving
 the shape.
 
 Applying the same method to the total of things, here too we
 discover the Intellectual-Principle and this we set down as
 veritably the maker and creator of the All. The underly has adopted,
 we see, certain shapes by which it becomes fire, water, air, earth;
 and these shapes have been imposed upon it by something else. This
 other is Soul which, hovering over the Four [the elements], imparts
 the pattern of the Kosmos, the Ideas for which it has itself
 received from the Intellectual-Principle as the soul or mind of the
 craftsman draws upon his craft for the plan of his work.
 
 The Intellectual-Principle is in one phase the Form of the soul,
 its shape; in another phase it is the giver of the shape- the
 sculptor, possessing inherently what is given- imparting to soul
 nearly the authentic reality while what body receives is but 
 image and
 imitation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. But, soul reached, why need we look higher; why not make this
 The First?
 
 A main reason is that the Intellectual-Principle is at once
 something other and something more powerful than Soul and that the
 more powerful is in the nature of things the prior. For it is
 certainly not true, as people imagine, that the soul, brought to
 perfection, produces Intellect. How could that potentiality come to
 actuality unless there be, first, an effective principle to 
 induce the
 actualization which, left to chance, might never occur?
 
 The Firsts must be supposed to exist in actuality, looking to
 nothing else, self-complete. Anything incomplete must be sequent
 upon these, and take its completion from the principles 
 engendering it
 which, like fathers, labour in the improvement of an offspring born
 imperfect: the produced is a Matter to the producing principle and
 is worked over by it into a shapely perfection.
 
 And if, further, soul is passible while something 
 impassible there
 must be or by the mere passage of time all wears away, here 
 too we are
 led to something above soul.
 
 Again there must be something prior to Soul because Soul 
 is in the
 world and there must be something outside a world in which, all
 being corporeal and material, nothing has enduring reality: failing
 such a prior, neither man nor the Ideas would be eternal or have
 true identity.
 
 These and many other considerations establish the necessary
 existence of an Intellectual-Principle prior to Soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. This Intellectual-Principle, if the term is to convey the
 truth, must be understood to be not a principle merely potential and
 not one maturing from unintelligence to intelligence- that would
 simply send us seeking, once more, a necessary prior- but a
 principle which is intelligence in actuality and in eternity.
 
 Now a principle whose wisdom is not borrowed must derive from
 itself any intellection it may make; and anything it may possess
 within itself it can hold only from itself: it follows that,
 intellective by its own resource and upon its own content, it is
 itself the very things on which its intellection acts.
 
 For supposing its essence to be separable from its intellection
 and the objects of its intellection to be not itself, then 
 its essence
 would be unintellectual; and it would be intellectual not 
 actually but
 potentially. The intellection and its object must then be 
 inseparable-
 however the habit induced by our conditions may tempt us to
 distinguish, There too, the thinker from the thought.
 
 What then is its characteristic Act and what the intellection
 which makes knower and known here identical?
 
 Clearly, as authentic Intellection, it has authentic
 intellection of the authentically existent, and establishes their
 existence. Therefore it is the Authentic Beings.
 
 Consider: It must perceive them either somewhere else or within
 itself as its very self: the somewhere else is impossible- 
 where could
 that be?- they are therefore itself and the content of itself.
 
 Its objects certainly cannot be the things of sense, as people
 think; no First could be of the sense-known order; for in things of
 sense the Idea is but an image of the authentic, and every Idea thus
 derivative and exiled traces back to that original and is no 
 more than
 an image of it.
 
 Further, if the Intellectual-Principle is to be the maker of
 this All, it cannot make by looking outside itself to what does not
 yet exist. The Authentic Beings must, then, exist before this All,
 no copies made on a model but themselves archetypes, primals, and
 the essence of the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 We may be told that Reason-Principles suffice [to the
 subsistence of the All]: but then these, clearly, must be 
 eternal; and
 if eternal, if immune, then they must exist in an
 Intellectual-Principle such as we have indicated, a principle
 earlier than condition, than nature, than soul, than anything whose
 existence is potential for contingent].
 
 The Intellectual-Principle, therefore, is itself the authentic
 existences, not a knower knowing them in some sphere foreign to it.
 The Authentic Beings, thus, exist neither before nor after it: it is
 the primal legislator to Being or, rather, is itself the law 
 of Being.
 Thus it is true that "Intellectual and Being are identical"; in the
 immaterial the knowledge of the thing is the thing. And this is the
 meaning of the dictum "I sought myself," namely as one of the
 Beings: it also bears on reminiscence.
 
 For none of the Beings is outside the 
 Intellectual-Principle or in
 space; they remain for ever in themselves, accepting no change, no
 decay, and by that are the authentically existent. Things that arise
 and fall away draw on real being as something to borrow 
 from; they are
 not of the real; the true being is that on which they draw.
 
 It is by participation that the sense-known has the being we
 ascribe to it; the underlying nature has taken its shape from
 elsewhere; thus bronze and wood are shaped into what we see by means
 of an image introduced by sculpture or carpentry; the craft
 permeates the materials while remaining integrally apart from the
 material and containing in itself the reality of statue or couch.
 And it is so, of course, with all corporeal things.
 
 This universe, characteristically participant in images, 
 shows how
 the image differs from the authentic beings: against the variability
 of the one order, there stands the unchanging quality of the other,
 self-situate, not needing space because having no magnitude, holding
 an existent intellective and self-sufficing. The body-kind seeks its
 endurance in another kind; the Intellectual-Principle, sustaining by
 its marvellous Being, the things which of themselves must fall, does
 not itself need to look for a staying ground.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. We take it, then, that the Intellectual-Principle is the
 authentic existences and contains them all- not as in a place but as
 possessing itself and being one thing with this its content. All are
 one there and yet are distinct: similarly the mind holds 
 many branches
 and items of knowledge simultaneously, yet none of them merged into
 any other, each acting its own part at call quite 
 independently, every
 conception coming out from the inner total and working singly. It is
 after this way, though in a closer unity, that the
 Intellectual-Principle is all Being in one total- and yet not in
 one, since each of these beings is a distinct power which, however,
 the total Intellectual-Principle includes as the species in a genus,
 as the parts in a whole. This relation may be illustrated by the
 powers in seed; all lies undistinguished in the unit, the formative
 ideas gathered as in one kernel; yet in that unit there is
 eye-principle, and there is hand-principle, each of which is
 revealed as a separate power by its distinct material product. Thus
 each of the powers in the seed is a Reason-Principle one and
 complete yet including all the parts over which it presides: there
 will be something bodily, the liquid, for example, carrying mere
 Matter; but the principle itself is Idea and nothing else, idea
 identical with the generative idea belonging to the lower soul,
 image of a higher. This power is sometimes designated as 
 Nature in the
 seed-life; its origin is in the divine; and, outgoing from its
 priors as light from fire, it converts and shapes the matter of
 things, not by push and pull and the lever work of which we hear so
 much, but by bestowal of the Ideas.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Knowledge in the reasoning soul is on the one side concerned
 with objects of sense, though indeed this can scarcely be called
 knowledge and is better indicated as opinion or 
 surface-knowing; it is
 of later origin than the objects since it is a reflection from them:
 but on the other hand there is the knowledge handling the 
 intellectual
 objects and this is the authentic knowledge; it enters the reasoning
 soul from the Intellectual-Principle and has no dealing with
 anything in sense. Being true knowledge it actually is everything of
 which it takes cognisance; it carries as its own content the
 intellectual act and the intellectual object since it carries the
 Intellectual-Principle which actually is the primals and is always
 self-present and is in its nature an Act, never by any want forced
 to seek, never acquiring or traversing the remote- for all such
 experience belongs to soul- but always self-gathered, the very Being
 of the collective total, not an extern creating things by the act of
 knowing them.
 
 Not by its thinking God does God come to be; not by its thinking
 Movement does Movement arise. Hence it is an error to call the Ideas
 intellections in the sense that, upon an intellectual act in this
 Principle, one such Idea or another is made to exist or exists. No:
 the object of this intellection must exist before the 
 intellective act
 [must be the very content not the creation of the
 Intellectual-Principle]. How else could that Principle come to know
 it: certainly not [as an external] by luck or by haphazard search.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. If, then, the Intellection is an act upon the inner 
 content [of
 a perfect unity], that content is at once the Idea [as object:
 eidos] and the Idea itself [as concept: idea].
 
 What, then, is that content?
 
 An Intellectual-Principle and an Intellective Essence, no
 concept distinguishable from the Intellectual-Principle, 
 each actually
 being that Principle. The Intellectual-Principle entire is the total
 of the Ideas, and each of them is the [entire]
 Intellectual-Principle in a special form. Thus a science 
 entire is the
 total of the relevant considerations each of which, again, 
 is a member
 of the entire science, a member not distinct in space yet having its
 individual efficacy in a total.
 
 This Intellectual-Principle, therefore, is a unity while by that
 possession of itself it is, tranquilly, the eternal abundance.
 
 If the Intellectual-Principle were envisaged as preceding Being,
 it would at once become a principle whose expression, its 
 intellectual
 Act, achieves and engenders the Beings: but, since we are 
 compelled to
 think of existence as preceding that which knows it, we can but
 think that the Beings are the actual content of the knowing
 principle and that the very act, the intellection, is inherent to
 the Beings, as fire stands equipped from the beginning with
 fire-act; in this conception, the Beings contain the
 Intellectual-Principle as one and the same with themselves, as their
 own activity. Thus, Being is itself an activity: there is one
 activity, then, in both or, rather, both are one thing.
 
 Being, therefore, and the Intellectual-Principle are one Nature:
 the Beings, and the Act of that which is, and the
 Intellectual-Principle thus constituted, all are one: and the
 resultant Intellections are the Idea of Being and its shape and its
 act.
 
 It is our separating habit that sets the one order before the
 other: for there is a separating intellect, of another order than
 the true, distinct from the intellect, inseparable and unseparating,
 which is Being and the universe of things.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. What, then, is the content- inevitably separated by our
 minds- of this one Intellectual-Principle? For there is no resource
 but to represent the items in accessible form just as we study the
 various articles constituting one science.
 
 This universe is a living thing capable of including 
 every form of
 life; but its Being and its modes are derived from elsewhere; that
 source is traced back to the Intellectual-Principle: it follows that
 the all-embracing archetype is in the Intellectual-Principle, which,
 therefore, must be an intellectual Kosmos, that indicated by Plato
 in the phrase "The living existent."
 
 Given the Reason-Principle [the outgoing divine Idea] of 
 a certain
 living thing and the Matter to harbour this seed-principle, 
 the living
 thing must come into being: in the same way once there exists- an
 intellective Nature, all powerful, and with nothing to check 
 it- since
 nothing intervenes between it and that which is of a nature 
 to receive
 it- inevitably the higher imprints form and the lower 
 accepts, it. The
 recipient holds the Idea in division, here man, there sun, while in
 the giver all remains in unity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. All, then, that is present in the sense realm as Idea comes
 from the Supreme. But what is not present as Idea, does not. Thus of
 things conflicting with nature, none is There: the inartistic is not
 contained in the arts; lameness is not in the seed; for a lame leg
 is either inborn through some thwarting of the Reason-principle or
 is a marring of the achieved form by accident. To that Intellectual
 Kosmos belong qualities, accordant with Nature, and 
 quantities; number
 and mass; origins and conditions; all actions and experiences not
 against nature; movement and repose, both the universals and the
 particulars: but There time is replaced by eternity and space by its
 intellectual equivalent, mutual inclusiveness.
 
 In that Intellectual Kosmos, where all is one total, every
 entity that can be singled out is an intellective essence and a
 participant in life: thus, identity and difference, movement and
 rest with the object resting or moving, essence and quality, all
 have essential existence. For every real being must be in actuality
 not merely in potentiality and therefore the nature of each 
 essence is
 inherent in it.
 
 This suggests the question whether the Intellectual Kosmos
 contains the forms only of the things of sense or of other existents
 as well. But first we will consider how it stands with artistic
 creations: there is no question of an ideal archetype of evil: the
 evil of this world is begotten of need, privation, deficiency, and
 is a condition peculiar to Matter distressed and to what has 
 come into
 likeness with Matter.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. Now as to the arts and crafts and their productions:
 
 The imitative arts- painting, sculpture, dancing, pantomimic
 gesturing- are, largely, earth-based; on an earthly base; they
 follow models found in sense, since they copy forms and movements
 and reproduce seen symmetries; they cannot therefore be referred to
 that higher sphere except indirectly, through the Reason-Principle
 in humanity.
 
 On the other hand any skill which, beginning with the
 observation of the symmetry of living things, grows to the 
 symmetry of
 all life, will be a portion of the Power There which observes and
 meditates the symmetry reigning among all beings in the Intellectual
 Kosmos. Thus all music- since its thought is upon melody and rhythm-
 must be the earthly representation of the music there is in 
 the rhythm
 of the Ideal Realm.
 
 The crafts, such as building and carpentry which give us 
 Matter in
 wrought forms, may be said, in that they draw on pattern, to take
 their principles from that realm and from the thinking There: but in
 that they bring these down into contact with the 
 sense-order, they are
 not wholly in the Intellectual: they are founded in man. So
 agriculture, dealing with material growths: so medicine watching
 over physical health; so the art which aims at corporeal strength
 and well-being: power and well-being mean something else There, the
 fearlessness and self-sufficing quality of all that lives.
 
 Oratory and generalship, administration and sovereignty- 
 under any
 forms in which their activities are associated with Good and 
 when they
 look to that- possess something derived thence and building up their
 knowledge from the knowledge There.
 
 Geometry, the science of the Intellectual entities, holds place
 There: so, too, philosophy, whose high concern is Being.
 
 For the arts and products of art, these observations may suffice.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. It should however be added that if the Idea of man exists in
 the Supreme, there must exist the Idea of reasoning man and of man
 with his arts and crafts; such arts as are the offspring of
 intellect Must be There.
 
 It must be observed that the Ideas will be of universals; not of
 Socrates but of Man: though as to man we may enquire whether the
 individual may not also have place There. Under the heading of
 individuality there is to be considered the repetition of the same
 feature from man to man, the simian type, for example, and the
 aquiline: the aquiline and the simian must be taken to be
 differences in the Idea of Man as there are different types of the
 animal: but Matter also has its effect in bringing about the 
 degree of
 aquilinity. Similarly with difference of complexion, 
 determined partly
 by the Reason-Principle, partly by Matter and by diversity of place.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. It remains to decide whether only what is known in sense
 exists There or whether, on the contrary, as Absolute-Man 
 differs from
 individual man, so there is in the Supreme an Absolute-Soul
 differing from Soul and an Absolute-Intellect differing from
 Intellectual-Principle.
 
 It must be stated at the outset that we cannot take all that is
 here to be image of archetype, or Soul to be an image of
 Absolute-Soul: one soul, doubtless, ranks higher than another, but
 here too, though perhaps not as identified with this realm, is the
 Absolute-Soul.
 
 Every soul, authentically a soul, has some form of rightness and
 moral wisdom; in the souls within ourselves there is true 
 knowing: and
 these attributes are no images or copies from the Supreme, as in the
 sense-world, but actually are those very originals in a mode
 peculiar to this sphere. For those Beings are not set apart in some
 defined place; wherever there is a soul that has risen from body,
 there too these are: the world of sense is one- where, the
 Intellectual Kosmos is everywhere. Whatever the freed soul attains
 to here, that it is There.
 
 Thus, if by the content of the sense-world we mean simply the
 visible objects, then the Supreme contains not only what is in the
 realm of sense but more: if in the content of the kosmos we mean to
 include Soul and the Soul-things, then all is here that is There.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. There is, thus, a Nature comprehending in the 
 Intellectual all
 that exists, and this Principle must be the source of all. But how,
 seeing that the veritable source must be a unity, simplex utterly?
 
 The mode by which from the unity arises the multiple, 
 how all this
 universe comes to be, why the Intellectual-Principle is all 
 and whence
 it springs, these matters demand another approach.
 
 But on the question as to whether the repulsive and the products
 of putridity have also their Idea- whether there is an Idea of filth
 and mud- it is to be observed that all that the 
 Intellectual-Principle
 derived from The First is of the noblest; in those Ideas the base is
 not included: these repulsive things point not to the
 Intellectual-Principle but to the Soul which, drawing upon the
 Intellectual-Principle, takes from Matter certain other things, and
 among them these.
 
 But all this will be more clearly brought out, when we 
 turn to the
 problem of the production of multiplicity from unity. Compounds, we
 shall see- as owing existence to hazard and not to the
 Intellectual-Principle, having been fused into objects of sense by
 their own impulse- are not to be included under Ideas.
 
 The products of putrefaction are to be traced to the Soul's
 inability to bring some other thing to being- something in the order
 of nature, which, else, it would- but producing where it may. In the
 matter of the arts and crafts, all that are to be traced to the
 needs of human nature are laid up in the Absolute Man.
 
 And before the particular Soul there is another Soul, a 
 universal,
 and, before that, an Absolute-Soul, which is the Life existing in
 the Intellectual-Principle before Soul came to be and therefore
 rightly called [as the Life in the Divine] the Absolute-Soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THE SIXTH ENNEAD
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIRST TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON THE KINDS OF BEING- (1).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Philosophy at a very early stage investigated the number and
 character of the Existents. Various theories resulted: some declared
 for one Existent, others for a finite number, others again for an
 infinite number, while as regards the nature of the Existents- one,
 numerically finite, or numerically infinite- there was a similar
 disagreement. These theories, in so far as they have been adequately
 examined by later workers, may be passed over here; our 
 attention must
 be directed upon the results of those whose examination has led them
 to posit on their awn account certain well-defined genera.
 
 These thinkers rejected pure unity on the ground of the
 plurality observed even in the Intellectual world; they rejected an
 infinite number as not reconcilable with the facts and as defying
 knowledge: considering the foundations of being to be "genera"
 rather than elements strictly so called, they concluded for a finite
 number. Of these "genera" some found ten, others less, 
 others no doubt
 more.
 
 But here again there is a divergence of views. To some the
 genera are first-principles; to others they indicate only a generic
 classification of the Existents themselves.
 
 Let us begin with the well-known tenfold division of the
 Existents, and consider whether we are to understand ten 
 genera ranged
 under the common name of Being, or ten categories. That the 
 term Being
 has not the same sense in all ten is rightly maintained.
 
 But a graver problem confronts us at the outset: Are the 
 ten found
 alike in the Intellectual and in the Sensible realms? Or are 
 all found
 in the Sensible and some only in the Intellectual? All in the
 Intellectual and some in the Sensible is manifestly impossible.
 
 At this point it would be natural to investigate which of the
 ten belong to both spheres, and whether the Existents of the
 Intellectual are to be ranged under one and the same genus with the
 Existents in the Sensible, or whether the term "Existence" [or
 Substance] is equivocal as applied to both realms. If the 
 equivocation
 exists, the number of genera will be increased: if there is no
 equivocation, it is strange to find the one same "Existence"
 applying to the primary and to the derivative Existents when there
 is no common genus embracing both primal and secondary.
 
 These thinkers are however not considering the Intellectual
 realm in their division, which was not intended to cover all the
 Existents; the Supreme they overlooked.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. But are we really obliged to posit the existence of such
 genera?
 
 Take Substance, for Substance must certainly be our
 starting-point: what are the grounds for regarding Substance as one
 single genus?
 
 It has been remarked that Substance cannot be a single entity
 common to both the Intellectual and the Sensible worlds. We may add
 that such community would entail the existence of something prior to
 Intellectual and Sensible Substances alike, something distinct from
 both as predicated of both; and this prior would be neither body nor
 unembodied; for it were one or the other, body would be 
 unembodied, or
 the unembodied would be the body.
 
 This conclusion must not however prevent our seeking in 
 the actual
 substance of the Sensible world an element held in common by Matter,
 by Form and by their Composite, all of which are designated as
 substances, though it is not maintained that they are Substance in
 an equal degree; Form is usually held to be Substance in a higher
 degree than Matter, and rightly so, in spite of those who would have
 Matter to be the more truly real.
 
 There is further the distinction drawn between what are known as
 First and Second Substances. But what is their common basis, seeing
 that the First are the source from which the Second derive 
 their right
 to be called substances?
 
 But, in sum, it is impossible to define Substance: determine its
 property, and still you have not attained to its essence. Even the
 definition, "That which, numerically one and the same, is 
 receptive of
 contraries," will hardly be applicable to all substances alike.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. But perhaps we should rather speak of some single category,
 embracing Intellectual Substance, Matter, Form, and the Composite of
 Matter and Form. One might refer to the family of the Heraclids as a
 unity in the sense, not of a common element in all its 
 members, but of
 a common origin: similarly, Intellectual Substance would be
 Substance in the first degree, the others being substances by
 derivation and in a lower degree.
 
 But what is the objection to including everything in a single
 category, all else of which existence is predicated being 
 derived from
 that one thing, Existence or Substance? Because, granted that things
 be no more than modifications of Substance, there is a distinct
 grading of substances themselves. Moreover, the single category does
 not put us in a position to build on Substance, or to grasp it in
 its very truth as the plausible source of the other substances.
 
 Supposing we grant that all things known as substances are
 homogeneous as possessing something denied to the other genera, what
 precisely is this something, this individuality, this 
 subject which is
 never a predicate, this thing not present in any thing as in a
 subject, this thing which does not owe its essential character to
 any other thing, as a quality takes character from a body and a
 quantity from a substance, as time is related to motion and motion
 to the moved?
 
 The Second Substance is, it is true, a predicate. But
 predication in this case signifies a different relation from 
 that just
 considered; it reveals the genus inherent in the subject and the
 subject's essential character, whereas whiteness is predicated of a
 thing in the sense of being present in the thing.
 
 The properties adduced may indeed be allowed to distinguish
 Substance from the other Existents. They afford a means of grouping
 substances together and calling them by a common name. They do not
 however establish the unity of a genus, and they do not 
 bring to light
 the concept and the nature of Substance.
 
 These considerations are sufficient for our purpose: let us now
 proceed to investigate the nature of Quantity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. We are told that number is Quantity in the primary sense,
 number together with all continuous magnitude, space and time: these
 are the standards to which all else that is considered as Quantity
 is referred, including motion which is Quantity because its time is
 quantitative- though perhaps, conversely, the time takes its
 continuity from the motion.
 
 If it is maintained that the continuous is a Quantity by the
 fact of its continuity, then the discrete will not be a Quantity.
 If, on the contrary, the continuous possesses Quantity as an 
 accident,
 what is there common to both continuous and discrete to make them
 quantities?
 
 Suppose we concede that numbers are quantities: we are merely
 allowing them the name of quantity; the principle which gives them
 this name remains obscure.
 
 On the other hand, line and surface and body are not called
 quantities; they are called magnitudes: they become known as
 quantities only when they are rated by number-two yards, three
 yards. Even the natural body becomes a quantity when 
 measured, as does
 the space which it occupies; but this is quantity accidental, not
 quantity essential; what we seek to grasp is not accidental quantity
 but Quantity independent and essential, Quantity-Absolute. Three
 oxen is not a quantity; it is their number, the three, that is
 Quantity; for in three oxen we are dealing with two 
 categories. So too
 with a line of a stated length, a surface of a given area; the area
 will be a quantity but not the surface, which only comes under that
 category when it constitutes a definite geometric figure.
 
 Are we then to consider numbers, and numbers only, as 
 constituting
 the category of Quantity? If we mean numbers in themselves, they are
 substances, for the very good reason that they exist 
 independently. If
 we mean numbers displayed in the objects participant in number, the
 numbers which give the count of the objects- ten horses or ten oxen,
 and not ten units- then we have a paradoxical result: first, the
 numbers in themselves, it would appear, are substances but 
 the numbers
 in objects are not; and secondly, the numbers inhere in the 
 objects as
 measures [of extension or weight], yet as standing outside 
 the objects
 they have no measuring power, as do rulers and scales. If however
 their existence is independent, and they do not inhere in 
 the objects,
 but are simply called in for the purpose of measurement, the objects
 will be quantities only to the extent of participating in Quantity.
 
 So with the numbers themselves: how can they constitute the
 category of Quantity? They are measures; but how do measures come to
 be quantities or Quantity? Doubtless in that, existing as they do
 among the Existents and not being adapted to any of the other
 categories, they find their place under the influence of verbal
 suggestion and so are referred to the so-called category of
 Quantity. We see the unit mark off one measurement and then 
 proceed to
 another; and number thus reveals the amount of a thing, and the mind
 measures by availing itself of the total figure.
 
 It follows that in measuring it is not measuring essence; it
 pronounces its "one" or "two," whatever the character of the
 objects, even summing contraries. It does not take count of 
 condition-
 hot, handsome; it simply notes how many.
 
 Number then, whether regarded in itself or in the participant
 objects, belongs to the category of Quantity, but the participant
 objects do not. "Three yards long" does not fall under the 
 category of
 Quantity, but only the three.
 
 Why then are magnitudes classed as quantities? Not because they
 are so in the strict sense, but because they approximate to
 Quantity, and because objects in which magnitudes inhere are
 themselves designated as quantities. We call a thing great or small
 from its participation in a high number or a low. True, greatness
 and smallness are not claimed to be quantities, but relations: but
 it is by their apparent possession of quantity that they are thought
 of as relations. All this, however, needs more careful examination.
 
 In sum, we hold that there is no single genus of Quantity. Only
 number is Quantity, the rest [magnitudes, space, time, motion]
 quantities only in a secondary degree. We have therefore not
 strictly one genus, but one category grouping the 
 approximate with the
 primary and the secondary.
 
 We have however to enquire in what sense the abstract numbers
 are substances. Can it be that they are also in a manner 
 quantitative?
 Into whatever category they fall, the other numbers [those 
 inherent in
 objects] can have nothing in common with them but the name. 
 5. Speech,
 time, motion- in what sense are these quantities?
 
 Let us begin with speech. It is subject to measurement, but only
 in so far as it is sound; it is not a quantity in its essential
 nature, which nature is that it be significant, as noun and verb are
 significant. The air is its Matter, as it is Matter to verb and
 noun, the components of speech.
 
 To be more precise, we may define speech as an impact [made upon
 the outer air by the breath], though it is not so much the impact as
 the impression which the impact produces and which, as it were,
 imposes Form [upon the air]. Speech, thus, is rather an action than
 a quantity- an action with a significance. Though perhaps it would
 be truer to say that while this motion, this impact, is an 
 action, the
 counter-motion is an experience [or Passion]; or each may be from
 different points of view either an action or an experience: or we
 may think of speech as action upon a substrate [air] and experience
 within that substrate.
 
 If however voice is not characteristically impact, but is simply
 air, two categories will be involved: voice is significant, and the
 one category will not be sufficient to account for this significance
 without associating with a second.
 
 With regard to time, if it is to be thought of as a measure, we
 must determine what it is that applies this measure. It must clearly
 be either Soul or the Present Moment. If on the contrary we take
 time to be something measured and regard it as being of such and
 such extension- a year, for example- then we may consider it as a
 quantity: essentially however time is of a different nature; the
 very fact that we can attribute this or that length to it shows us
 that it is not length: in other words, time is not Quantity.
 Quantity in the strict sense is the Quantity not inbound with
 things; if things became quantities by mere participation in 
 Quantity,
 then Substance itself would be identical with Quantity.
 
 Equality and inequality must be regarded as properties of
 Quantity-Absolute, not of the participants, or of them not 
 essentially
 but only accidentally: such participants as "three yards' length,"
 which becomes a quantity, not as belonging to a single genus of
 Quantity, but by being subsumed under the one head, the one category.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. In considering Relation we must enquire whether it possesses
 the community of a genus, or whether it may on other grounds be
 treated as a unity.
 
 Above all, has Relation- for example, that of right and left,
 double and half- any actuality? Has it, perhaps, actuality in some
 cases only, as for instance in what is termed "posterior" but not in
 what is termed "prior"? Or is its actuality in no case conceivable?
 
 What meaning, then, are we to attach to double and half and all
 other cases of less and more; to habit and disposition, reclining,
 sitting, standing; to father, son, master, slave; to like, unlike,
 equal, unequal; to active and passive, measure and measured; or
 again to knowledge and sensation, as related respectively to the
 knowable and the sensible?
 
 Knowledge, indeed, may be supposed to entail in relation to the
 known object some actual entity corresponding to that object's Ideal
 Form, and similarly with sensation as related to the 
 sense-object. The
 active will perform some constant function in relation to 
 the passive,
 as will the measure in relation to the measured.
 
 But what will emerge from the relation of like to like? Nothing
 will emerge. Likeness is the inherence of qualitative identity; its
 entire content is the quality present in the two objects.
 
 From equality, similarly, nothing emerges. The relation merely
 presupposes the existence of a quantitative identity;- is nothing
 but our judgement comparing objects essentially independent and
 concluding, "This and that have the same magnitude, the same
 quality; this has produced that; this is superior to that."
 
 Again, what meaning can sitting and standing have apart from
 sitter and stander? The term "habit" either implies a 
 having, in which
 case it signifies possession, or else it arises from something had,
 and so denotes quality; and similarly with disposition.
 
 What then in these instances can be the meaning of correlatives
 apart from our conception of their juxtaposition? "Greater" may
 refer to very different magnitudes; "different" to all sorts of
 objects: the comparison is ours; it does not lie in the things
 themselves.
 
 Right and left, before and behind, would seem to belong less to
 the category of Relation than to that of Situation. Right means
 "situated at one point," left means "situated at another." But the
 right and left are in our conception, nothing of them in the things
 themselves.
 
 Before and after are merely two times; the relation is again of
 our making.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Now if we do not mean anything by Relation but are victims of
 words, none of the relations mentioned can exist: Relation will be a
 notion void of content.
 
 Suppose however that we do possess ourselves of objective truth
 when in comparing two points of time we pronounce one prior, or
 posterior, to the other, that priority does entail something
 distinct from the objects to which it refers; admit an 
 objective truth
 behind the relation of left and right: does this apply also to
 magnitudes, and is the relation exhibiting excess and deficiency
 also something distinct from the quantities involved?
 
 Now one thing is double of another quite apart from our speech
 or thought; one thing possesses and another is possessed before we
 notice the fact; equals do not await our comparison but- and this
 applies to Quality as well as Quantity- rest upon an 
 identity existing
 between the objects compared: in all the conditions in which 
 we assert
 Relation the mutual relation exists over and above the objects; we
 perceive it as already existent; our knowledge is directed upon a
 thing, there to be known- a clear testimony to the reality of
 Relation.
 
 In these circumstances we can no longer put the question of its
 existence. We have simply to distinguish: sometimes the relation
 subsists while the objects remain unaltered and even apart;
 sometimes it depends upon their combination; sometimes, while they
 remain unchanged, the relation utterly ceases, or, as happens with
 right and near, becomes different. These are the facts which chiefly
 account for the notion that Relation has no reality in such
 circumstances.
 
 Our task, thus, is to give full value to this elusive 
 character of
 Relation, and, then to enquire what there is that is constant in all
 these particular cases and whether this constant is generic or
 accidental; and having found this constant, we must discover 
 what sort
 of actuality it possesses.
 
 It need hardly be said that we are not to affirm Relation where
 one thing is simply an attribute of another, as a habit is an
 attribute of a soul or of a body; it is not Relation when a soul
 belongs to this individual or dwells in that body. Relation enters
 only when the actuality of the relationships is derived from no
 other source than Relation itself; the actuality must be, not that
 which is characteristic of the substances in question, but that
 which is specifically called relative. Thus double with its
 correlative, half gives actuality neither to two yards' length or
 the number two, nor to one yard's length or the number one; what
 happens is that, when these quantities are viewed in their relation,
 they are found to be not merely two and one respectively, but to
 produce the assertion and to exhibit the fact of standing one to the
 other in the condition of double and half. Out of the objects in a
 certain conjunction this condition of being double and half 
 has issued
 as something distinct from either; double and half have emerged as
 correlatives, and their being is precisely this of mutual
 dependence; the double exists by its superiority over the half, and
 the half by its inferiority; there is no priority to distinguish
 double from half; they arise simultaneously.
 
 It is another question whether they endure simultaneously. Take
 the case of father and son, and such relationships; the father dies,
 but the other is still his son, and so with brothers. 
 Moreover, we see
 likeness where one of the like people is dead.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. But we are digressing: we must resume our enquiry into the
 cause of dissimilarity among relations. Yet we must first be
 informed what reality, common to all cases, is possessed by this
 Existence derived from mutual conditions.
 
 Now the common principle in question cannot be a body. The only
 alternative is that, if it does exist, it be something bodiless,
 either in the objects thus brought together or outside of them.
 
 Further, if Relation always takes the same form, the term is
 univocal [and specific differentiation is impossible]; if 
 not, that is
 if it differs from case to case, the term is equivocal, and the same
 reality will not necessarily be implied by the mere use of the term
 Relation.
 
 How then shall we distinguish relations? We may observe that
 some things have an inactive or dormant relation, with which their
 actuality is entirely simultaneous; others, combining power and
 function with their relation, have the relation in some mode always
 even though the mode be merely that of potentiality, but attain to
 actual being only in contact with their correlatives. Or perhaps all
 distinctions may be reduced to that between producer and product,
 where the product merely gives a name to the producer of its
 actuality: an example of this is the relation of father to 
 son, though
 here both producer and product have a sort of actuality, 
 which we call
 life.
 
 Are we thus, then, to divide Relation, and thereby reject the
 notion of an identical common element in the different kinds of
 Relation, making it a universal rule that the relation takes a
 different character in either correlative? We must in this case
 recognise that in our distinction between productive and
 non-productive relations we are overlooking the equivocation
 involved in making the terms cover both action and passion, as
 though these two were one, and ignoring the fact that 
 production takes
 a different form in the two correlatives. Take the case of equality,
 producing equals: nothing is equal without equality, nothing 
 identical
 without identity. Greatness and smallness both entail a presence-
 the presence of greatness and smallness respectively. When we come
 to greater and smaller, the participants in these relations are
 greater and smaller only when greatness and smallness are actually
 observed in them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. It follows that in the cases specified above- agent,
 knowledge and the rest- the relation must be considered as in actual
 operation, and the Act and the Reason-Principle in the Act must be
 assumed to be real: in all other cases there will be simply
 participation in an Ideal-Form, in a Reason-Principle.
 
 If Reality implied embodiment, we should indeed be forced to
 deny Reality to these conditions called relative; if however 
 we accord
 the pre-eminent place to the unembodied and to the
 Reason-Principles, and at the same time maintain that relations are
 Reason-Principles and participate in Ideal-Forms, we are 
 bound to seek
 their causes in that higher sphere. Doubleness, it is clear, is the
 cause of a thing being double, and from it is derived halfness.
 
 Some correlatives owe their designations to the same Form,
 others to opposite Forms; it is thus that two objects are
 simultaneously double and half of each other, and one great and the
 other small. It may happen that both correlatives exist in one
 object-likeness and unlikeness, and, in general, identity and
 difference, so that the same thing will be at once like and unlike,
 identical and different.
 
 The question arises here whether sharing in the same Form could
 make one man depraved and another more depraved. In the case of
 total depravity, clearly the two are made equal by the absence of a
 Form. Where there is a difference of degree, the one has
 participated in a Form which has failed to predominate, the 
 other in a
 Form which has failed still more: or, if we choose the negative
 aspect, we may think of them both as failing to participate in a
 Form which naturally belonged to them.
 
 Sensation may be regarded as a Form of double origin [determined
 both by the sense-organ and by the sensible object]; and similarly
 with knowledge.
 
 Habit is an Act directed upon something had [some experience
 produced by habit] and binding it as it were with the subject having
 [experiencing], as the Act of production binds producer and product.
 
 Measurement is an Act of the measurer upon the measured 
 object: it
 too is therefore a kind of Reason-Principle.
 
 Now if the condition of being related is regarded as a 
 Form having
 a generic unity, Relation must be allowed to be a single genus owing
 its reality to a Reason-Principle involved in all instances. If
 however the Reason-Principles [governing the correlatives] stand
 opposed and have the differences to which we have referred, there
 may perhaps not be a single genus, but this will not prevent all
 relatives being expressed in terms of a certain likeness and falling
 under a single category.
 
 But even if the cases of which we have spoken can be subsumed
 under a single head, it is nevertheless impossible to include in a
 single genus all that goes with them in the one common category: for
 the category includes negations and derivatives- not only, for
 example, double but also its negative, the resultant doubleness and
 the act of doubling. But we cannot include in one genus both 
 the thing
 and its negative- double and not-double, relative and not-relative-
 any more than in dealing with the genus animal we can insert 
 in it the
 nonanimal. Moreover, doubleness and doubling have only the relation
 to double that whiteness has to white; they cannot be classed as
 identical with it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. As regards Quality, the source of what we call a "quale," we
 must in the first place consider what nature it possesses in
 accordance with which it produces the "qualia," and whether, 
 remaining
 one and the same in virtue of that common ground, it has also
 differences whereby it produces the variety of species. If 
 there is no
 common ground and the term Quality involves many connotations, there
 cannot be a single genus of Quality.
 
 What then will be the common ground in habit, 
 disposition, passive
 quality, figure, shape? In light, thick and lean?
 
 If we hold this common ground to be a power adapting 
 itself to the
 forms of habits, dispositions and physical capacities, a power which
 gives the possessor whatever capacities he has, we have no plausible
 explanation of incapacities. Besides, how are figure and the shape
 of a given thing to be regarded as a power?
 
 Moreover, at this, Being will have no power qua Being but only
 when Quality has been added to it; and the activities of those
 substances which are activities in the highest degree, will be
 traceable to Quality, although they are autonomous and owe their
 essential character to powers wholly their own!
 
 Perhaps, however, qualities are conditioned by powers which are
 posterior to the substances as such [and so do not interfere with
 their essential activities]. Boxing, for example, is not a power of
 man qua man; reasoning is: therefore reasoning, on this 
 hypothesis, is
 not quality but a natural possession of the mature human being; it
 therefore is called a quality only by analogy. Thus, Quality is a
 power which adds the property of being qualia to substances already
 existent.
 
 The differences distinguishing substances from each other are
 called qualities only by analogy; they are, more strictly, Acts and
 Reason-Principles, or parts of Reason-Principles, and though they
 may appear merely to qualify the substance, they in fact indicate
 its essence.
 
 Qualities in the true sense- those, that is, which determine
 qualia- being in accordance with our definition powers, will 
 in virtue
 of this common ground be a kind of Reason-Principle; they 
 will also be
 in a sense Forms, that is, excellences and imperfections whether of
 soul or of body.
 
 But how can they all be powers? Beauty or health of soul or
 body, very well: but surely not ugliness, disease, weakness,
 incapacity. In a word, is powerlessness a power?
 
 It may be urged that these are qualities in so far as qualia are
 also named after them: but may not the qualia be so called 
 by analogy,
 and not in the strict sense of the single principle? Not only may
 the term be understood in the four ways [of Aristotle], but each of
 the four may have at least a twofold significance.
 
 In the first place, Quality is not merely a question of 
 action and
 passion, involving a simple distinction between the 
 potentially active
 [quality] and the passive: health, disposition and habit, disease,
 strength and weakness are also classed as qualities. It follows that
 the common ground is not power, but something we have still to seek.
 
 Again, not all qualities can be regarded as Reason-Principles:
 chronic disease cannot be a Reason-Principle. Perhaps, however, we
 must speak in such cases of privations, restricting the term
 "Quantities" to Ideal-Forms and powers. Thus we shall have, not a
 single genus, but reference only to the unity of a category. 
 Knowledge
 will be regarded as a Form and a power, ignorance as a privation and
 powerlessness.
 
 On the other hand, powerlessness and disease are a kind of Form;
 disease and vice have many powers though looking to evil.
 
 But how can a mere failure be a power? Doubtless the 
 truth is that
 every quality performs its own function independently of a standard;
 for in no case could it produce an effect outside of its power.
 
 Even beauty would seem to have a power of its own. Does 
 this apply
 to triangularity?
 
 Perhaps, after all, it is not a power we must consider, but a
 disposition. Thus, qualities will be determined by the forms and
 characteristics of the object qualified: their common element, then,
 will be Form and ideal type, imposed upon Substance and posterior to
 it.
 
 But then, how do we account for the powers? We may doubtless
 remark that even the natural boxer is so by being constituted in a
 particular way; similarly, with the man unable to box: to
 generalize, the quality is a characteristic non-essential. 
 Whatever is
 seen to apply alike to Being and to non-Being, as do heat and
 whiteness and colours generally, is either different from Being- is,
 for example, an Act of Being- or else is some secondary of Being,
 derived from it, contained in it, its image and likeness.
 
 But if Quality is determined by formation and characteristic and
 Reason-Principle, how explain the various cases of powerlessness and
 deformity? Doubtless we must think of Principles imperfectly
 present, as in the case of deformity. And disease- how does 
 that imply
 a Reason-Principle? Here, no doubt, we must think of a principle
 disturbed, the Principle of health.
 
 But it is not necessary that all qualities involve a
 Reason-Principle; it suffices that over and above the 
 various kinds of
 disposition there exist a common element distinct from Substance,
 and it is what comes after the substance that constitutes Quality in
 an object.
 
 But triangularity is a quality of that in which it is present;
 it is however no longer triangularity as such, but the triangularity
 present in that definite object and modified in proportion to its
 success in shaping that object.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. But if these considerations are sound, why has Quality more
 than one species? What is the ground for distinguishing between
 habit and disposition, seeing that no differentia of Quality is
 involved in permanence and non-permanence? A disposition of any kind
 is sufficient to constitute a quality; permanence is a mere external
 addition. It might however be urged that dispositions are but
 incomplete "forms"- if the term may pass- habits being complete
 ones. But incomplete, they are not qualities; if already qualities,
 the permanence is an external addition.
 
 How do physical powers form a distinct species? If they are
 classed as qualities in virtue of being powers, power, we have seen,
 is not a necessary concomitant of qualities. If, however, we 
 hold that
 the natural boxer owes his quality to a particular disposition,
 power is something added and does not contribute to the 
 quality, since
 power is found in habits also.
 
 Another point: why is natural ability to be distinguished from
 that acquired by learning? Surely, if both are qualities, they
 cannot be differentiae of Quality: gained by practice or given in
 nature, it is the same ability; the differentia will be external to
 Quality; it cannot be deduced from the Ideal Form of boxing. Whether
 some qualities as distinguished from others are derived from
 experience is immaterial; the source of the quality makes no
 difference- none, I mean, pointing to variations and differences of
 Quality.
 
 A further question would seem to be involved: If certain 
 qualities
 are derived from experience but here is a discrepancy in the manner
 and source of the experience, how are they to be included in the
 same species? And again, if some create the experience, others are
 created by it, the term Quality as applied to both classes will be
 equivocal.
 
 And what part is played by the individual form? If it
 constitutes the individual's specific character, it is not a
 quality; if, however, it is what makes an object beautiful or ugly
 after the specific form has been determined, then it involves a
 Reason-Principle.
 
 Rough and smooth, tenuous and dense may rightly be classed as
 qualities. It is true that they are not determined by distances and
 approximations, or in general by even or uneven dispositions, of
 parts; though, were they so determined, they might well even then be
 qualities.
 
 Knowledge of the meaning of "light" and "heavy" will reveal
 their place in the classification. An ambiguity will however 
 be latent
 in the term "light," unless it be determined by comparative 
 weight: it
 would then implicate leanness and fineness, and involve another
 species distinct from the four [of Aristotle].
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. If then we do not propose to divide Quality in this 
 [fourfold]
 manner, what basis of division have we?
 
 We must examine whether qualities may not prove to be 
 divisible on
 the principle that some belong to the body and others to the soul.
 Those of the body would be subdivided according to the senses, some
 being attributed to sight, others to hearing and taste, others to
 smell and touch. Those of the soul would presumably be allotted to
 appetite, emotion, reason; though, again, they may be 
 distinguished by
 the differences of the activities they condition, in so far as
 activities are engendered by these qualities; or according 
 as they are
 beneficial or injurious, the benefits and injuries being duly
 classified. This last is applicable also to the classification of
 bodily qualities, which also produce differences of benefit and
 injury: these differences must be regarded as distinctively
 qualitative; for either the benefit and injury are held to be
 derived from Quality and the quale, or else some other explanation
 must be found for them.
 
 A point for consideration is how the quale, as conditioned by
 Quality, can belong to the same category: obviously there can be no
 single genus embracing both.
 
 Further, if "boxer" is in the category of Quality, why 
 not "agent"
 as well? And with agent goes "active." Thus "active" need not go
 into the category of Relation; nor again need "passive," if
 "patient" is a quale. Moreover, agent" is perhaps better assigned to
 the category of Quality for the reason that the term implies power,
 and power is Quality. But if power as such were determined by
 Substance [and not by Quality], the agent, though ceasing to be a
 quale, would not necessarily become a relative. Besides, "active" is
 not like "greater": the greater, to be the greater, demands a less,
 whereas "active" stands complete by the mere possession of its
 specific character.
 
 It may however be urged that while the possession of that
 character makes it a quale, it is a relative in so far as it directs
 upon an external object the power indicated by its name. 
 Why, then, is
 not "boxer" a relative, and "boxing" as well? Boxing is entirely
 related to an external object; its whole theory pre-supposes this
 external. And in the case of the other arts- or most of them-
 investigation would probably warrant the assertion that in so far as
 they affect the soul they are qualities, while in so far as they
 look outward they are active and as being directed to an external
 object are relatives. They are relatives in the other sense also
 that they are thought of as habits.
 
 Can it then be held that there is any distinct reality implied
 in activity, seeing that the active is something distinct only
 according as it is a quale? It may perhaps be held that the tendency
 towards action of living beings, and especially of those having
 freewill, implies a reality of activity [as well as a reality of
 Quality].
 
 But what is the function of the active in connection with those
 non-living powers which we have classed as qualities? Doubtless to
 recruit any object it encounters, making the object a participant in
 its content.
 
 But if one same object both acts and is acted upon, how 
 do we then
 explain the active? Observe also that the greater- in itself 
 perhaps a
 fixed three yards' length- will present itself as both greater and
 less according to its external contacts.
 
 It will be objected that greater and less are due to 
 participation
 in greatness and smallness; and it might be inferred that a thing is
 active or passive by participation in activity or passivity.
 
 This is the place for enquiring also whether the qualities of
 the Sensible and Intellectual realms can be included under 
 one head- a
 question intended only for those who ascribe qualities to the higher
 realm as well as the lower. And even if Ideal Forms of qualities are
 not posited, yet once the term "habit" is used in reference to
 Intellect, the question arises whether there is anything common to
 that habit and the habit we know in the lower.
 
 Wisdom too is generally admitted to exist There. Obviously, if
 it shares only its name with our wisdom, it is not to be reckoned
 among things of this sphere; if, however, the import is in both
 cases the same, then Quality is common to both realms- unless, of
 course, it be maintained that everything There, including even
 intellection, is Substance.
 
 This question, however, applies to all the categories: 
 are the two
 spheres irreconcilable, or can they be co-ordinated with a unity?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. With regard to Date:
 
 If "yesterday," "to-morrow," "last year" and similar terms
 denote parts of time, why should they not be included in the same
 genus as time? It would seem only reasonable to range under time the
 past, present and future, which are its species. But time is
 referred to Quantity; what then is the need for a separate 
 category of
 Date?
 
 If we are told that past and future- including under past such
 definite dates as yesterday and last year which must clearly be
 subordinate to past time- and even the present "now" are not merely
 time but time- when, we reply, in the first place, that the notion
 of time- when involves time; that, further, if "yesterday" is
 time-gone-by, it will be a composite, since time and gone-by are
 distinct notions: we have two categories instead of the single one
 required.
 
 But suppose that Date is defined not as time but as that which
 is in time; if by that which is in time is meant the 
 subject- Socrates
 in the proposition "Socrates existed last year"- that subject is
 external to the notion of time, and we have again a duality.
 
 Consider, however, the proposition "Socrates- or some action-
 exists at this time"; what can be the meaning here other than "in a
 part of time"? But if, admitted that Date is "a part of time," it be
 felt that the part requires definition and involves something more
 than mere time, that we must say the part of time gone by, several
 notions are massed in the proposition: we have the part 
 which qua part
 is a relative; and we have "gone-by" which, if it is to have any
 import at all, must mean the past: but this "past," we have shown,
 is a species of time.
 
 It may be urged that "the past" is in its nature 
 indefinite, while
 "yesterday" and "last year" are definite. We reply, first, that we
 demand some place in our classification for the past: secondly, that
 "yesterday," as definite past, is necessarily definite time. But
 definite time implies a certain quantity of time: therefore, if time
 is quantitative, each of the terms in question must signify 
 a definite
 quantity.
 
 Again, if by "yesterday" we are expected to understand that this
 or that event has taken Place at a definite time gone by, we 
 have more
 notions than ever. Besides, if we must introduce fresh categories
 because one thing acts in another- as in this case something acts in
 time- we have more again from its acting upon another in 
 another. This
 point will be made plain by what follows in our discussion of Place.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. The Academy and the Lyceum are places, and parts of Place,
 just as "above," "below," "here" are species or parts of Place; the
 difference is of minuter delimitation.
 
 If then "above," "below," "the middle" are places- Delphi, for
 example, is the middle [of the earth]- and "near-the-middle" 
 is also a
 place- Athens, and of course the Lyceum and the other places usually
 cited, are near the middle- what need have we to go further and seek
 beyond Place, admitting as we do that we refer in every instance to
 a place?
 
 If, however, we have in mind the presence of one thing 
 in another,
 we are not speaking of a single entity, we are not 
 expressing a single
 notion.
 
 Another consideration: when we say that a man is here, we
 present a relation of the man to that in which he is, a relation of
 the container to the contained. Why then do we not class as 
 a relative
 whatever may be produced from this relation?
 
 Besides, how does "here" differ from "at Athens"? The
 demonstrative "here" admittedly signifies place; so, then, does "at
 Athens": "at Athens" therefore belongs to the category of Place.
 
 Again, if "at Athens" means "is at Athens," then the "is" as
 well as the place belongs to the predicate; but this cannot be
 right: we do not regard "is a quality" as predicate, but "a quality."
 
 Furthermore, if "in time," "in place" are to be ranged under a
 category other than that applying to time and place, why not a
 separate category for "in a vessel"? Why not distinct categories for
 "in Matter," "in a subject," "a part in a whole," "a whole in its
 parts," "a genus in its species," "a species in a genus"? We are
 certainly on the way to a goodly number of categories.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. The "category of Action":
 
 The quantum has been regarded as a single genus on the 
 ground that
 Quantity and Number are attributes of Substance and posterior to it;
 the quale has been regarded as another genus because Quality is an
 attribute of Substance: on the same principle it is maintained that
 since activity is an attribute of Substance, Action constitutes yet
 another genus.
 
 Does then the action constitute the genus, or the activity from
 which the action springs, in the same way as Quality is the 
 genus from
 which the quale is derived? Perhaps activity, action and agent
 should all be embraced under a single head? But, on the one hand,
 the action- unlike activity- tends to comport the agent; and on the
 other, it signifies being in some activity and therefore
 Being-in-Act [actual as distinct from potential Being]. Consequently
 the category will be one of Act rather than of Action.
 
 Act moreover incontestably manifests itself in Substance, as was
 found to be the case with Quality: it is connected with Substance as
 being a form of motion. But Motion is a distinct genus: for, seeing
 that Quality is a distinct attribute of Substance, and Quality a
 distinct attribute, and Relative takes its being from the relation
 of one substance to another, there can be no reason why Motion, also
 an attribute of Substance, should not also constitute a distinct
 genus.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. If it be urged that Motion is but imperfect Act, there would
 be no objection to giving priority to Act and subordinating to it
 Motion with its imperfection as a species: Act would thus be
 predicated of Motion, but with the qualification "imperfect."
 
 Motion is thought of as imperfect, not because it is not an Act,
 but because, entirely an Act, it yet entails repetition [lacks
 finality]. It repeats, not in order that it may achieve actuality-
 it is already actual- but that it may attain a goal distinct from
 itself and posterior: it is not the motion itself that is then
 consummated but the result at which it aims. Walking is walking from
 the outset; when one should traverse a racecourse but has 
 not yet done
 so, the deficiency lies not in the walking- not in the motion- but
 in the amount of walking accomplished; no matter what the amount, it
 is walking and motion already: a moving man has motion and a cutter
 cuts before there is any question of Quantity. And just as we can
 speak of Act without implying time, so we can of Motion, 
 except in the
 sense of motion over a defined area; Act is timeless, and so 
 is Motion
 pure and simple.
 
 Are we told that Motion is necessarily in time, inasmuch as it
 involves continuity? But, at this, sight, never ceasing to see, will
 also be continuous and in time. Our critic, it is true, may find
 support in that principle of proportion which states that 
 you may make
 a division of no matter what motion, and find that neither the
 motion nor its duration has any beginning but that the 
 division may be
 continued indefinitely in the direction of the motion's origin: this
 would mean that a motion just begun has been in progress from an
 infinity of time, that it is infinite as regards its beginning.
 
 Such then is the result of separating Act from Motion: Act, we
 aver, is timeless; yet we are forced to maintain not only 
 that time is
 necessary to quantitative motion, but, unreservedly, that Motion is
 quantitative in its very nature; though indeed, if it were a case of
 motion occupying a day or some other quantity of time, the exponents
 of this view would be the first to admit that Quantity is present to
 Motion only by way of accident.
 
 In sum, just as Act is timeless, so there is no reason why
 Motion also should not primarily be timeless, time attaching to it
 only in so far as it happens to have such and such an extension.
 
 Timeless change is sanctioned in the expression, "as if change
 could not take place all at once"; if then change is 
 timeless, why not
 Motion also?- Change, be it noted, is here distinguished from the
 result of change, the result being unnecessary to establish 
 the change
 itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. We may be told that neither Act nor Motion requires a genus
 for itself, but that both revert to Relation, Act belonging to the
 potentially active, Motion to the potentially motive. Our reply is
 that Relation produces relatives as such, and not the mere reference
 to an external standard; given the existence of a thing, whether
 attributive or relative, it holds its essential character 
 prior to any
 relationship: so then must Act and Motion, and even such an
 attribute as habit; they are not prevented from being prior to any
 relationship they may occupy, or from being conceivable in 
 themselves.
 Otherwise, everything will be relative; for anything you think of-
 even Soul- bears some relationship to something else.
 
 But, to return to activity proper and the action, is there any
 reason why these should be referred to Relation? They must in every
 instance be either Motion or Act.
 
 If however activity is referred to Relation and the action made
 a distinct genus, why is not Motion referred to Relation and the
 movement made a distinct genus? Why not bisect the unity, Motion,
 and so make Action and Passion two species of the one thing, ceasing
 to consider Action and Passion as two genera?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. There are other questions calling for consideration:
 
 First: Are both Acts and motions to be included in the 
 category of
 Action, with the distinction that Acts are momentary while Motions,
 such as cutting, are in time? Or will both be regarded as motions or
 as involving Motion?
 
 Secondly: Will all activities be related to passivity, or will
 some- for example, walking and speaking- be considered as
 independent of it?
 
 Thirdly: Will all those related to passivity be classed 
 as motions
 and the independent as Acts, or will the two classes 
 overlap? Walking,
 for instance, which is an independent, would, one supposes, be a
 motion; thinking, which also does not essentially involve 
 "passivity,"
 an Act: otherwise we must hold that thinking and walking are not
 even actions. But if they are not in the category of Action, where
 then in our classification must they fall?
 
 It may perhaps be urged that the act of thinking, together with
 the faculty of thought, should be regarded as relative to the
 thought object; for is not the faculty of sensation treated as
 relative to the sensible object? If then, we may ask, in the
 analogue the faculty of sensation is treated as relative to the
 sensible object, why not the sensory act as well? The fact is that
 even sensation, though related to an external object, has something
 besides that relation: it has, namely, its own status of being
 either an Act or a Passion. Now the Passion is separable from the
 condition of being attached to some object and caused by some
 object: so, then, is the Act a distinct entity. Walking is similarly
 attached and caused, and yet has besides the status of being 
 a motion.
 It follows that thought, in addition to its relationship, will have
 the status of being either a motion or an Act.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 19
 
 19. We have to ask ourselves whether there are not certain Acts
 which without the addition of a time-element will be thought of as
 imperfect and therefore classed with motions. Take for 
 instance living
 and life. The life of a definite person implies a certain adequate
 period, just as his happiness is no merely instantaneous thing. Life
 and happiness are, in other words, of the nature ascribed to Motion:
 both therefore must be treated as motions, and Motion must 
 be regarded
 as a unity, a single genus; besides the quantity and quality 
 belonging
 to Substance we must take count of the motion manifested in it.
 
 We may further find desirable to distinguish bodily from psychic
 motions or spontaneous motions from those induced by external
 forces, or the original from the derivative, the original motions
 being activities, whether externally related or independent, 
 while the
 derivative will be Passions.
 
 But surely the motions having external tendency are actually
 identical with those of external derivation: the cutting issuing
 from the cutter and that effected in the object are one, 
 though to cut
 is not the same as to be cut.
 
 Perhaps however the cutting issuing from the cutter and 
 that which
 takes place in the cut object are in fact not one, but "to cut"
 implies that from a particular Act and motion there results a
 different motion in the object cut. Or perhaps the 
 difference [between
 Action and Passion] lies not in the fact of being cut, but in the
 distinct emotion supervening, pain for example: passivity has this
 connotation also.
 
 But when there is no pain, what occurs? Nothing, surely, but the
 Act of the agent upon the patient object: this is all that 
 is meant in
 such cases by Action. Action, thus, becomes twofold: there is that
 which occurs in the external, and that which does not. The duality
 of Action and Passion, suggested by the notion that Action [always]
 takes place in an external, is abandoned.
 
 Even writing, though taking place upon an external object, does
 not call for passivity, since no effect is produced, upon the tablet
 beyond the Act of the writer, nothing like pain; we may be told that
 the tablet has been inscribed, but this does not suffice for
 passivity.
 
 Again, in the case of walking there is the earth trodden 
 upon, but
 no one thinks of it as having experienced Passion [or suffering].
 Treading on a living body, we think of suffering, because we reflect
 not upon the walking but upon the ensuing pain: otherwise we should
 think of suffering in the case of the tablet as well.
 
 It is so in every case of Action: we cannot but think of it as
 knit into a unity with its opposite, Passion. Not that this later
 "Passion" is the opposite of Action in the way in which being burned
 is the opposite of burning: by Passion in this sense we mean the
 effect supervening upon the combined facts of the burning and the
 being burned, whether this effect be pain or some such process as
 withering.
 
 Suppose this Passion to be treated as of itself producing pain:
 have we not still the duality of agent and patient, two results from
 the one Act? The Act may no longer include the will to cause 
 pain; but
 it produces something distinct from itself, a pain-causing medium
 which enters into the object about to experience pain: this medium,
 while retaining its individuality, produces something yet different,
 the feeling of pain.
 
 What does this suggest? Surely that the very medium- the act of
 hearing, for instance- is, even before it produces pain or without
 producing pain at all, a Passion of that into which it enters.
 
 But hearing, with sensation in general, is in fact not a
 Passion. Yet to feel pain is to experience a Passion- a Passion
 however which is not opposed to Action.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 20
 
 20. But though not opposed, it is still different from Action
 and cannot belong to the same genus as activity; though if they are
 both Motion, it will so belong, on the principle that alteration
 must be regarded as qualitative motion.
 
 Does it follow that whenever alteration proceeds from Quality,
 it will be activity and Action, the quale remaining impassive? It
 may be that if the quale remains impassive, the alteration will be
 in the category of Action; whereas if, while its energy is directed
 outwards, it also suffers- as in beating- it will cease to belong to
 that category: or perhaps there is nothing to prevent its being in
 both categories at one and the same moment.
 
 If then an alteration be conditioned by Passivity alone, 
 as is the
 case with rubbing, on what ground is it assigned to Action 
 rather than
 to Passivity? Perhaps the Passivity arises from the fact that a
 counter-rubbing is involved. But are we, in view of this
 counter-motion, to recognize the presence of two distinct 
 motions? No:
 one only.
 
 How then can this one motion be both Action and Passion? We must
 suppose it to be Action in proceeding from an object, and Passion in
 being directly upon another- though it remains the same motion
 throughout.
 
 Suppose however Passion to be a different motion from Action:
 how then does its modification of the patient object change that
 patient's character without the agent being affected by the patient?
 For obviously an agent cannot be passive to the operation it
 performs upon another. Can it be that the fact of motion existing
 elsewhere creates the Passion, which was not Passion in the agent?
 
 If the whiteness of the swan, produced by its 
 Reason-Principle, is
 given at its birth, are we to affirm Passion of the swan on its
 passing into being? If, on the contrary, the swan grows white after
 birth, and if there is a cause of that growth and the corresponding
 result, are we to say that the growth is a Passion? Or must 
 we confine
 Passion to purely qualitative change?
 
 One thing confers beauty and another takes it: is that 
 which takes
 beauty to be regarded as patient? If then the source of beauty- tin,
 suppose- should deteriorate or actually disappear, while the
 recipient- copper- improves, are we to think of the copper as
 passive and the tin active?
 
 Take the learner: how can he be regarded as passive, seeing that
 the Act of the agent passes into him [and becomes his Act]? How can
 the Act, necessarily a simple entity, be both Act and Passion? No
 doubt the Act is not in itself a Passion; nonetheless, the learner
 coming to possess it will be a patient by the fact of his
 appropriation of an experience from outside: he will not, of course,
 be a patient in the sense of having himself performed no Act;
 learning- like seeing- is not analogous to being struck, since it
 involves the acts of apprehension and recognition.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 21
 
 21. How, then, are we to recognise Passivity, since clearly it
 is not to be found in the Act from outside which the 
 recipient in turn
 makes his own? Surely we must look for it in cases where the patient
 remains without Act, the passivity pure.
 
 Imagine a case where an agent improves, though its Act tends
 towards deterioration. Or, say, a a man's activity is guided by evil
 and is allowed to dominate another's without restraint. In 
 these cases
 the Act is clearly wrong, the Passion blameless.
 
 What then is the real distinction between Action and Passion? Is
 it that Action starts from within and is directed upon an outside
 object, while Passion is derived from without and fulfilled within?
 What, then, are we to say of such cases as thought and opinion which
 originate within but are not directed outwards? Again, the Passion
 "being heated" rises within the self, when that self is 
 provoked by an
 opinion to reflection or to anger, without the intervention of any
 external. Still it remains true that Action, whether self-centred or
 with external tendency, is a motion rising in the self.
 
 How then do we explain desire and other forms of aspiration?
 Aspiration must be a motion having its origin in the object aspired
 to, though some might disallow "origin" and be content with saying
 that the motion aroused is subsequent to the object; in what
 respect, then, does aspiring differ from taking a blow or being
 borne down by a thrust?
 
 Perhaps, however, we should divide aspirations into two classes,
 those which follow intellect being described as Actions, the merely
 impulsive being Passions. Passivity now will not turn on origin,
 without or within- within there can only be deficiency; but 
 whenever a
 thing, without itself assisting in the process, undergoes an
 alteration not directed to the creation of Being but changing the
 thing for the worse or not for the better, such an alteration will
 be regarded as a Passion and as entailing passivity.
 
 If however "being heated" means "acquiring heat," and is 
 sometimes
 found to contribute to the production of Being and sometimes not,
 passivity will be identical with impassivity: besides, "being
 heated" must then have a double significance [according as it does
 or does not contribute to Being].
 
 The fact is, however, that "being heated," even when it
 contributes to Being, involves the presence of a patient [distinct
 from the being produced]. Take the case of the bronze which has to
 be heated and so is a patient; the being is a statue, which is not
 heated except accidentally [by the accident of being contained in
 the bronze]. If then the bronze becomes more beautiful as a result
 of being heated and in the same proportion, it certainly 
 becomes so by
 passivity; for passivity must, clearly, take two forms: there is the
 passivity which tends to alteration for better or for worse, 
 and there
 is the passivity which has neither tendency.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 22
 
 22. Passivity, thus, implies the existence within of a motion
 functioning somehow or other in the direction of alteration. Action
 too implies motion within, whether the motion be aimless or 
 whether it
 be driven by the impulse comported by the term "Action" to find its
 goal in an external object. There is Motion in both Action and
 Passion, but the differentia distinguishing Action from Passion keeps
 Action impassive, while Passion is recognised by the fact that a new
 state replaces the old, though nothing is added to the essential
 character of the patient; whenever Being [essential Being] is
 produced, the patient remains distinct.
 
 Thus, what is Action in one relation may be Passion in another.
 One same motion will be Action from the point of view of A, Passion
 from that of B; for the two are so disposed that they might well be
 consigned to the category of Relation- at any rate in the cases
 where the Action entails a corresponding Passion: neither
 correlative is found in isolation; each involves both Action and
 Passion, though A acts as mover and B is moved: each then 
 involves two
 categories.
 
 Again, A gives motion to B, B receives it, so that we have a
 giving and a receiving- in a word, a relation.
 
 But a recipient must possess what it has received. A thing is
 admitted to possess its natural colour: why not its motion also?
 Besides, independent motions such as walking and thought do, in
 fact, involve the possession of the powers respectively to 
 walk and to
 think.
 
 We are reminded to enquire whether thought in the form of
 providence constitutes Action; to be subject to providence is
 apparently Passion, for such thought is directed to an external, the
 object of the providential arrangement. But it may well be that
 neither is the exercise of providence an action, even though the
 thought is concerned with an external, nor subjection to it 
 a Passion.
 Thought itself need not be an action, for it does not go outward
 towards its object but remains self-gathered. It is not always an
 activity; all Acts need not be definable as activities, for they
 need not produce an effect; activity belongs to Act only 
 accidentally.
 
 Does it follow that if a man as he walks produces footprints, he
 cannot be considered to have performed an action? Certainly as a
 result of his existing something distinct from himself has come into
 being. Yet perhaps we should regard both action and Act as merely
 accidental, because he did not aim at this result: it would be as we
 speak of Action even in things inanimate- "fire heats," "the drug
 worked."
 
 So much for Action and Passion.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 23
 
 23. As for Possession, if the term is used comprehensively, why
 are not all its modes to be brought under one category? Possession,
 thus, would include the quantum as possessing magnitude, the quale
 as possessing colour; it would include fatherhood and the
 complementary relationships, since the father possesses the son and
 the son possesses the father: in short, it would include all
 belongings.
 
 If, on the contrary, the category of Possession 
 comprises only the
 things of the body, such as weapons and shoes, we first ask why this
 should be so, and why their possession produces a single category,
 while burning, cutting, burying or casting them out do not give
 another or others. If it is because these things are carried on the
 person, then one's mantle lying on a couch will come under a 
 different
 category from that of the mantle covering the person. If the 
 ownership
 of possession suffices, then clearly one must refer to the one
 category of Possession all objects identified by being possessed,
 every case in which possession can be established; the character of
 the possessed object will make no difference.
 
 If however Possession is not to be predicated of Quality because
 Quality stands recognised as a category, nor of Quantity because the
 category of Quantity has been received, nor of parts because 
 they have
 been assigned to the category of Substance, why should we predicate
 Possession of weapons, when they too are comprised in the accepted
 category of Substance? Shoes and weapons are clearly substances.
 
 How, further, is "He possesses weapons," signifying as it does
 that the action of arming has been performed by a subject, to be
 regarded as an entirely simple notion, assignable to a single
 category?
 
 Again, is Possession to be restricted to an animate possessor,
 or does it hold good even of a statue as possessing the objects
 above mentioned? The animate and inanimate seem to possess in
 different ways, and the term is perhaps equivocal. Similarly,
 "standing" has not the same connotation as applied to the animate
 and the inanimate.
 
 Besides, how can it be reasonable for what is found only in a
 limited number of cases to form a distinct generic category?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 24
 
 24. There remains Situation, which like Possession is confined
 to a few instances such as reclining and sitting.
 
 Even so, the term is not used without qualification: we say
 "they are placed in such and such a manner," "he is situated in such
 and such a position." The position is added from outside the genus.
 
 In short, Situation signifies "being in a place"; there are two
 things involved, the position and the place: why then must two
 categories be combined into one?
 
 Moreover, if sitting signifies an Act, it must be classed among
 Acts; if a Passion, it goes under the category to which belong
 Passions complete and incomplete.
 
 Reclining is surely nothing but "lying up," and tallies with
 "lying down" and "lying midway." But if the reclining belongs thus
 to the category of Relation, why not the recliner also? For 
 as "on the
 right" belongs to the Relations, so does "the thing on the 
 right"; and
 similarly with "the thing on the left."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 25
 
 25. There are those who lay down four categories and make a
 fourfold division into Substrates, Qualities, States, and Relative
 States, and find in these a common Something, and so include
 everything in one genus.
 
 Against this theory there is much to be urged, but particularly
 against this posing of a common Something and a single all-embracing
 genus. This Something, it may be submitted, is unintelligible to
 themselves, is indefinable, and does not account either for bodies
 or for the bodiless. Moreover, no room is left for a differentia by
 which this Something may be distinguished. Besides, this common
 Something is either existent or non-existent: if existent, it must
 be one or other of its [four] species;- if non-existent, the
 existent is classed under the non-existent. But the objections are
 countless; we must leave them for the present and consider 
 the several
 heads of the division.
 
 To the first genus are assigned Substrates, including Matter, to
 which is given a priority over the others; so that what is ranked as
 the first principle comes under the same head with things which must
 be posterior to it since it is their principle.
 
 First, then: the prior is made homogeneous with the subsequent.
 Now this is impossible: in this relation the subsequent owes its
 existence to the prior, whereas among things belonging to one same
 genus each must have, essentially, the equality implied by the
 genus; for the very meaning of genus is to be predicated of the
 species in respect of their essential character. And that Matter is
 the basic source of all the rest of things, this school, we may
 suppose, would hardly deny.
 
 Secondly: since they treat the Substrate as one thing, 
 they do not
 enumerate the Existents; they look instead for principles of the
 Existents. There is however a difference between speaking of the
 actual Existents and of their principles.
 
 If Matter is taken to be the only Existent, and all other things
 as modifications of Matter, it is not legitimate to set up a single
 genus to embrace both the Existent and the other things; consistency
 requires that Being [Substance] be distinguished from its
 modifications and that these modifications be duly classified.
 
 Even the distinction which this theory makes between Substrates
 and the rest of things is questionable. The Substrate is 
 [necessarily]
 one thing and admits of no differentia- except perhaps in so far as
 it is split up like one mass into its various parts; and yet not
 even so, since the notion of Being implies continuity: it would be
 better, therefore, to speak of the Substrate, in the singular.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 26
 
 26. But the error in this theory is fundamental. To set 
 Matter the
 potential above everything, instead of recognising the primacy of
 actuality, is in the highest degree perverse. If the potential holds
 the primacy among the Existents, its actualization becomes 
 impossible;
 it certainly cannot bring itself into actuality: either the actual
 exists previously, and so the potential is not the first-principle,
 or, if the two are to be regarded as existing simultaneously, the
 first-principles must be attributed to hazard. Besides, if they are
 simultaneous, why is not actuality given the primacy? Why is the
 potential more truly real than the actual?
 
 Supposing however that the actual does come later than the
 potential, how must the theory proceed? Obviously Matter does not
 produce Form: the unqualified does not produce Quality, nor does
 actuality take its origin in the potential; for that would mean that
 the actual was inherent in the potential, which at once 
 becomes a dual
 thing.
 
 Furthermore, God becomes a secondary to Matter, inasmuch as even
 he is regarded as a body composed of Matter and Form- though how he
 acquires the Form is not revealed. If however he be admitted to
 exist apart from Matter in virtue of his character as a principle
 and a rational law [logos], God will be bodiless, the Creative Power
 bodiless. If we are told that he is without Matter but is 
 composite in
 essence by the fact of being a body, this amounts to introducing
 another Matter, the Matter of God.
 
 Again, how can Matter be a first-principle, seeing that it is
 body? Body must necessarily be a plurality, since all bodies are
 composite of Matter and Quality. If however body in this 
 case is to be
 understood in some different way, then Matter is identified with
 body only by an equivocation.
 
 If the possession of three dimensions is given as the
 characteristic of body, then we are dealing simply with mathematical
 body. If resistance is added, we are no longer considering a unity:
 besides, resistance is a quality or at least derived from Quality.
 
 And whence is this resistance supposed to come? Whence the three
 dimensions? What is the source of their existence? Matter is not
 comprised in the concept of the three-dimensional, nor the
 three-dimensional in the concept of Matter; if Matter 
 partakes thus of
 extension, it can no longer be a simplex.
 
 Again, whence does Matter derive its unifying power? It is
 assuredly not the Absolute Unity, but has only that of participation
 in Unity.
 
 We inevitably conclude that Mass or Extension cannot be ranked
 as the first of things; Non-Extension and Unity must be 
 prior. We must
 begin with the One and conclude with the Many, proceed to magnitude
 from that which is free from magnitude: a One is necessary to the
 existence of a Many, Non-Magnitude to that of Magnitude. Magnitude
 is a unity not by being Unity-Absolute, but by participation 
 and in an
 accidental mode: there must be a primary and absolute preceding the
 accidental, or the accidental relation is left unexplained.
 
 The manner of this relation demands investigation. Had this been
 undertaken, the thinkers of this school would probably have lighted
 upon that Unity which is not accidental but essential and underived.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 27
 
 27. On other grounds also, it is indefensible not to 
 have reserved
 the high place for the true first-principle of things but to have
 set up in its stead the formless, passive and lifeless, the
 irrational, dark and indeterminate, and to have made this the source
 of Being. In this theory God is introduced merely for the sake of
 appearance: deriving existence from Matter he is a composite, a
 derivative, or, worse, a mere state of Matter.
 
 Another consideration is that, if Matter is a substrate, there
 must be something outside it, which, acting on it and distinct from
 it, makes it the substrate of what is poured into it. But if God is
 lodged in Matter and by being involved in Matter is himself no more
 than a substrate, he will no longer make Matter a substrate nor be
 himself a substrate in conjunction with Matter. For of what will
 they be substrates, when that which could make them substrates is
 eliminated? This so-called substrate turns out to have swallowed up
 all that is; but a substrate must be relative, and relative 
 not to its
 content but to something which acts upon it as upon a datum.
 
 Again, the substrate comports a relation to that which is not
 substrate; hence, to something external to it: there must, then, be
 something apart from the substrate. If nothing distinct and external
 is considered necessary, but the substrate itself can become
 everything and adopt every character, like the versatile 
 dancer in the
 pantomime, it ceases to be a substrate: it is, essentially,
 everything. The mime is not a substrate of the characters he puts
 on; these are in fact the realisation of his own personality:
 similarly, if the Matter with which this theory presents us comports
 in its own being all the realities, it is no longer the substrate of
 all: on the contrary, the other things can have no reality whatever,
 if they are no more than states of Matter in the sense that the
 poses of the mime are states through which he passes.
 
 Then, those other things not existing, Matter will not be a
 substrate, nor will it have a place among the Existents; it will be
 Matter bare, and for that reason not even Matter, since Matter is a
 relative. The relative is relative to something else: it must,
 further, be homogeneous with that something else: double is relative
 to half, but not Substance to double.
 
 How then can an Existent be relative to a Non-existent, except
 accidentally? But the True-Existent, or Matter, is related (to what
 emerges from it) as Existent to Non-Existent. For if potentiality is
 that which holds the promise of existence and that promise does not
 constitute Reality, the potentiality cannot be a Reality. In sum,
 these very teachers who deprecate the production of Realities from
 Nonrealities, themselves produce Non-reality from Reality; 
 for to them
 the universe as such is not a Reality.
 
 But is it not a paradox that, while Matter, the Substrate, is to
 them an existence, bodies should not have more claim to 
 existence, the
 universe yet more, and not merely a claim grounded on the reality of
 one of its parts?
 
 It is no less paradoxical that the living form should owe
 existence not to its soul but to its Matter only, the soul being but
 an affection of Matter and posterior to it. From what source then
 did Matter receive ensoulment? Whence, in short, is soul's entity
 derived? How does it occur that Matter sometimes turns into bodies,
 while another part of it turns into Soul? Even supposing that Form
 might come to it from elsewhere, that accession of Quality to Matter
 would account not for Soul, but simply for organized body soulless.
 If, on the contrary, there is something which both moulds Matter and
 produces Soul, then prior to the produced there must be Soul the
 producer.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 28
 
 28. Many as are the objections to this theory, we pass 
 on for fear
 of the ridicule we might incur by arguing against a position 
 itself so
 manifestly ridiculous. We may be content with pointing out that it
 assigns the primacy to the Non-existent and treats it as the very
 summit of Existence: in short, it places the last thing first. The
 reason for this procedure lies in the acceptance of sense-perception
 as a trustworthy guide to first-principles and to all other entities.
 
 This philosophy began by identifying the Real with body; then,
 viewing with apprehension the transmutations of bodies, decided that
 Reality was that which is permanent beneath the superficial changes-
 which is much as if one regarded space as having more title 
 to Reality
 than the bodies within it, on the principle that space does 
 not perish
 with them. They found a permanent in space, but it was a 
 fault to take
 mere permanence as in itself a sufficient definition of the Real;
 the right method would have been to consider what properties must
 characterize Reality, by the presence of which properties it has
 also that of unfailing permanence. Thus if a shadow had permanence,
 accompanying an object through every change, that would not make it
 more real than the object itself. The sensible universe, as
 including the Substrate and a multitude of attributes, will thus
 have more claim to be Reality entire than has any one of its 
 component
 entities (such as Matter): and if the sensible were in very truth
 the whole of Reality, Matter, the mere base and not the total, could
 not be that whole.
 
 Most surprising of all is that, while they make sense-perception
 their guarantee of everything, they hold that the Real cannot be
 grasped by sensation;- for they have no right to assign to 
 Matter even
 so much as resistance, since resistance is a quality. If however
 they profess to grasp Reality by Intellect, is it not a strange
 Intellect which ranks Matter above itself, giving Reality to Matter
 and not to itself? And as their "Intellect" has, thus, no
 Real-Existence, how can it be trustworthy when it speaks of things
 higher than itself, things to which it has no affinity whatever?
 
 But an adequate treatment of this entity [Matter] and of
 substrates will be found elsewhere.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 29
 
 29. Qualities must be for this school distinct from Substrates.
 This in fact they acknowledge by counting them as the second 
 category.
 If then they form a distinct category, they must be simplex; that is
 to say they are not composite; that is to say that as qualities,
 pure and simple, they are devoid of Matter: hence they are bodiless
 and active, since Matter is their substrate- a relation of passivity.
 
 If however they hold Qualities to be composite, that is a
 strange classification which first contrasts simple and composite
 qualities, then proceeds to include them in one genus, and finally
 includes one of the two species [simple] in the other [composite];
 it is like dividing knowledge into two species, the first comprising
 grammatical knowledge, the second made up of grammatical and other
 knowledge.
 
 Again, if they identify Qualities with qualifications of Matter,
 then in the first place even their Seminal Principles [Logoi] will
 be material and will not have to reside in Matter to produce a
 composite, but prior to the composite thus produced they will
 themselves be composed of Matter and Form: in other words, they will
 not be Forms or Principles. Further, if they maintain that 
 the Seminal
 Principles are nothing but Matter in a certain state, they evidently
 identify Qualities with States, and should accordingly classify them
 in their fourth genus. If this is a state of some peculiar kind,
 what precisely is its differentia? Clearly the state by its
 association with Matter receives an accession of Reality: yet if
 that means that when divorced from Matter it is not a 
 Reality, how can
 State be treated as a single genus or species? Certainly one genus
 cannot embrace the Existent and the Non-existent.
 
 And what is this state implanted in Matter? It is either real,
 or unreal: if real, absolutely bodiless: if unreal, it is introduced
 to no purpose; Matter is all there is; Quality therefore is nothing.
 The same is true of State, for that is even more unreal; the alleged
 Fourth Category more so.
 
 Matter then is the sole Reality. But how do we come to know
 this? Certainly not from Matter itself. How, then? From 
 Intellect? But
 Intellect is merely a state of Matter, and even the "state" is an
 empty qualification. We are left after all with Matter alone 
 competent
 to make these assertions, to fathom these problems. And if its
 assertions were intelligent, we must wonder how it thinks 
 and performs
 the functions of Soul without possessing either Intellect or 
 Soul. If,
 then, it were to make foolish assertions, affirming itself to be
 what it is not and cannot be, to what should we ascribe this folly?
 Doubtless to Matter, if it was in truth Matter that spoke. But
 Matter does not speak; anyone who says that it does proclaims the
 predominance of Matter in himself; he may have a soul, but he is
 utterly devoid of Intellect, and lives in ignorance of himself and
 of the faculty alone capable of uttering the truth in these things.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 30
 
 30. With regard to States:
 
 It may seem strange that States should be set up as a 
 third class-
 or whatever class it is- since all States are referable to Matter.
 We shall be told that there is a difference among States, and that a
 State as in Matter has definite characteristics 
 distinguishing it from
 all other States and further that, whereas Qualities are States of
 Matter, States properly so-called belong to Qualities. But if
 Qualities are nothing but States of Matter, States [in the strict
 sense of the term] are ultimately reducible to Matter, and under
 Matter they must be classed.
 
 Further, how can States constitute a single genus, when there is
 such manifold diversity among them? How can we group together three
 yards long" and "white"- Quantity and Quality respectively? Or again
 Time and Place? How can "yesterday," "last year," "in the 
 Lyceum," "in
 the Academy," be States at all? How can Time be in any sense a
 State? Neither is Time a State nor the events in Time, neither the
 objects in Space nor Space itself.
 
 And how can Action be a State? One acting is not in a state of
 being but in a state of Action, or rather in Action simply: no state
 is involved. Similarly, what is predicated of the patient is not a
 state of being but a state of Passion, or strictly, Passion
 unqualified by state.
 
 But it would seem that State was the right category at least for
 cases of Situation and Possession: yet Possession does not imply
 possession of some particular state, but is Possession absolute.
 
 As for the Relative State, if the theory does not include it in
 the same genus as the other States, another question arises: we must
 enquire whether any actuality is attributed to this 
 particular type of
 relation, for to many types actuality is denied.
 
 It is, moreover, absurd that an entity which depends upon the
 prior existence of other entities should be classed in the same
 genus with those priors: one and two must, clearly, exist, 
 before half
 and double can.
 
 The various speculations on the subject of the Existents and the
 principles of the Existents, whether they have entailed an 
 infinite or
 a finite number, bodily or bodiless, or even supposed the 
 Composite to
 be the Authentic Existent, may well be considered separately with
 the help of the criticisms made by the ancients upon them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SECOND TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON THE KINDS OF BEING (2).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. We have examined the proposed "ten genera": we have discussed
 also the theory which gathers the total of things into one genus and
 to this subordinates what may be thought of as its four species. The
 next step is, naturally, to expound our own views and to try to show
 the agreement of our conclusions with those of Plato.
 
 Now if we were obliged to consider Being as a unity, the 
 following
 questions would be unnecessary:
 
 Is there one genus embracing everything, or are there 
 genera which
 cannot be subsumed under such a unity? Are there 
 first-principles? Are
 first-principles to be identified with genera, or genera with
 first-principles? Or is it perhaps rather the case that while not
 all genera are first-principles, all first-principles are at the
 same time genera? Or is the converse true? Or again, do both classes
 overlap, some principles being also genera, and some genera also
 principles? And do both the sets of categories we have been
 examining imply that only some principles are genera and some genera
 principles? or does one of them presuppose that all that belongs to
 the class of genera belongs also to the class of principles?
 
 Since, however, we affirm that Being is not a unity- the reason
 for this affirmation is stated by Plato and others- these questions
 become imperative, once we are satisfied as to the number of 
 genera to
 be posited and the grounds for our choice.
 
 The subject of our enquiry, then, is the Existent or Existents,
 and it presents immediately two problems demanding separate analysis:
 
 What do we mean by the Existent? This is naturally the first
 question to be examined.
 
 What is that which, often taken for Being [for the Existent], is
 in our view Becoming and never really Being? Note however that these
 concepts are not to be taken as distinguished from each other in the
 sense of belonging to a genus, Something, divided into Being and
 Becoming; and we must not suppose that Plato took this view. It
 would be absurd to assign Being to the same genus as non-Being: this
 would be to make one genus of Socrates and his portrait. The
 division here [between what has Being and what is in 
 Becoming] means a
 definite marking-off, a setting asunder, leading to the 
 assertion that
 what takes the appearance of Being is not Being and implying that
 the nature of True Being has been quite misapprehended. Being, we
 are taught, must have the attribute of eternity, must be so
 constituted as never to belie its own nature.
 
 This, then, is the Being of which we shall treat, and in our
 investigation we shall assume that it is not a unity: subsequently
 we ask leave to say something on the nature of Becoming and 
 on what it
 is that comes to be, that is, on the nature of the world of Sense.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. In asserting that Being is not a unity, we do not 
 mean to imply
 a definite number of existences; the number may well be infinite: we
 mean simply that it is many as well as one, that it is, so 
 to speak, a
 diversified unity, a plurality in unity.
 
 It follows that either the unity so regarded is a unity of genus
 under which the Existents, involving as they do plurality as well as
 unity, stand as species; or that while there are more genera 
 than one,
 yet all are subordinate to a unity; or there may be more genera than
 one, though no one genus is subordinate to any other, but all with
 their own subordinates- whether these be lesser genera, or species
 with individuals for their subordinates- all are elements in one
 entity, and from their totality the Intellectual realm- that which
 we know as Being- derives its constitution.
 
 If this last is the truth, we have here not merely genera, but
 genera which are at the same time principles of Being. They 
 are genera
 because they have subordinates- other genera, and 
 successively species
 and individuals; they are also principles, since from this plurality
 Being takes its rise, constituted in its entirety from these its
 elements.
 
 Suppose, however, a greater number of origins which by their
 mere totality comprised, without possessing any subordinates, the
 whole of Being; these would be first-principles but not genera: it
 would be as if one constructed the sensible world from the four
 elements- fire and the others; these elements would be first
 principles, but they would not be genera, unless the term "genus" is
 to be used equivocally.
 
 But does this assertion of certain genera which are at the same
 time first-principles imply that by combining the genera, each with
 its subordinates, we find the whole of Being in the resultant
 combination? But then, taken separately, their existence will not be
 actual but only potential, and they will not be found in isolation.
 
 Suppose, on the other hand, we ignore the genera and combine the
 particulars: what then becomes of the ignored genera? They will,
 surely, exist in the purity of their own isolation, and the mixtures
 will not destroy them. The question of how this result is 
 achieved may
 be postponed.
 
 For the moment we take it as agreed that there are genera as
 distinct from principles of Being and that, on another plane,
 principles [elements] are opposed to compounds. We are thus 
 obliged to
 show in what relation we speak of genera and why we distinguish them
 instead of summing them under a unity; for otherwise we imply that
 their coalescence into a unity is fortuitous, whereas it 
 would be more
 plausible to dispense with their separate existence.
 
 If all the genera could be species of Being, all individuals
 without exception being immediately subordinate to these 
 species, then
 such a unification becomes feasible. But that supposition bespeaks
 annihilation for the genera: the species will no longer be species;
 plurality will no longer be subordinated to unity; everything must
 be the unity, unless there exist some thing or things outside the
 unity. The One never becomes many- as the existence of species
 demands- unless there is something distinct from it: it cannot of
 itself assume plurality, unless we are to think of it as being
 broken into pieces like some extended body: but even so, the force
 which breaks it up must be distinct from it: if it is itself 
 to effect
 the breaking up- or whatever form the division may take- then it is
 itself previously divided.
 
 For these and many other reasons we must abstain from positing a
 single genus, and especially because neither Being nor Substance can
 be the predicate of any given thing. If we do predicate Being, it is
 only as an accidental attribute; just as when we predicate whiteness
 of a substance, we are not predicating the Absolute Whiteness.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. We assert, then, a plurality of Existents, but a plurality
 not fortuitous and therefore a plurality deriving from a unity.
 
 But even admitting this derivation from a unity- a unity however
 not predicated of them in respect of their essential being- there
 is, surely, no reason why each of these Existents, distinct in
 character from every other, should not in itself stand as a separate
 genus.
 
 Is, then, this unity external to the genera thus produced, this
 unity which is their source though it cannot be predicated of them
 in respect of their essence? it is indeed external; the One 
 is beyond;
 it cannot, therefore, be included among the genera: it is the
 [transcendent] source, while they stand side by side as genera. Yet
 surely the one must somehow be included [among the genera]? No: it
 is the Existents we are investigating, not that which is beyond
 Existence.
 
 We pass on, then, to consider that which is included, and find
 to our surprise the cause included with the things it causes: it is
 surely strange that causes and effects should be brought 
 into the same
 genus.
 
 But if the cause is included with its effects only in 
 the sense in
 which a genus is included with its subordinates, the subordinates
 being of a different order, so that it cannot be predicated of them
 whether as their genus or in any other relation, these subordinates
 are obviously themselves genera with subordinates of their own: you
 may, for example, be the cause of the operation of walking, but the
 walking is not subordinate to you in the relation of species 
 to genus;
 and if walking had nothing prior to it as its genus, but had
 posteriors, then it would be a [primary] genus and rank among the
 Existents.
 
 Perhaps, however, it must be utterly denied that unity 
 is even the
 cause of other things; they should be considered rather as its parts
 or elements- if the terms may be allowed,- their totality 
 constituting
 a single entity which our thinking divides. All unity though 
 it be, it
 goes by a wonderful power out into everything; it appears as many
 and becomes many when there is a motion; the fecundity of its nature
 causes the One to be no longer one, and we, displaying what we call
 its parts, consider them each as a unity and make them into
 "genera," unaware of our failure to see the whole at once. We
 display it, then, in parts, though, unable to restrain their natural
 tendency to coalesce, we bring these parts together again, 
 resign them
 to the whole and allow them to become a unity, or rather to be a
 unity.
 
 All this will become clearer in the light of further
 consideration- when, that is to say, we have ascertained the 
 number of
 the genera; for thus we shall also discover their causes. It is not
 enough to deny; we must advance by dint of thought and
 comprehension. The way is clear:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. If we had to ascertain the nature of body and the place it
 holds in the universe, surely we should take some sample of body,
 say stone, and examine into what constituents it may be 
 divided. There
 would be what we think of as the substrate of stone, its quantity-
 in this case, a magnitude; its quality- for example, the colour of
 stone. As with stone, so with every other body: we should see that
 in this thing, body, there are three distinguishable
 characteristics- the pseudo-substance, the quantity, the quality-
 though they all make one and are only logically trisected, the three
 being found to constitute the unit thing, body. If motion 
 were equally
 inherent in its constitution, we should include this as well, and
 the four would form a unity, the single body depending upon them all
 for its unity and characteristic nature.
 
 The same method must be applied in examining the Intellectual
 Substance and the genera and first-principles of the Intellectual
 sphere.
 
 But we must begin by subtracting what is peculiar to body, its
 coming-to-be, its sensible nature, its magnitude- that is to say,
 the characteristics which produce isolation and mutual separation.
 It is an Intellectual Being we have to consider, an Authentic
 Existent, possessed of a unity surpassing that of any sensible thing.
 
 Now the wonder comes how a unity of this type can be many as
 well as one. In the case of body it was easy to concede
 unity-with-plurality; the one body is divisible to infinity; its
 colour is a different thing from its shape, since in fact they are
 separated. But if we take Soul, single, continuous, without 
 extension,
 of the highest simplicity- as the first effort of the mind makes
 manifest- how can we expect to find multiplicity here too? 
 We believed
 that the division of the living being into body and soul was final:
 body indeed was manifold, composite, diversified; but in soul we
 imagined we had found a simplex, and boldly made a halt, supposing
 that we had come to the limit of our course.
 
 Let us examine this soul, presented to us from the Intellectual
 realm as body from the Sensible. How is its unity a plurality? How
 is its plurality a unity? Clearly its unity is not that of a 
 composite
 formed from diverse elements, but that of a single nature 
 comprising a
 plurality.
 
 This problem attacked and solved, the truth about the genera
 comprised in Being will thereby, as we asserted, be elucidated also.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. A first point demanding consideration:
 
 Bodies- those, for example, of animals and plants- are each a
 multiplicity founded on colour and shape and magnitude, and on the
 forms and arrangement of parts: yet all these elements spring from a
 unity. Now this unity must be either Unity-Absolute or some 
 unity less
 thorough-going and complete, but necessarily more complete than that
 which emerges, so to speak, from the body itself; this will 
 be a unity
 having more claim to reality than the unity produced from it, for
 divergence from unity involves a corresponding divergence from
 Reality. Since, thus, bodies take their rise from unity, but not
 "unity" in the sense of the complete unity or 
 Unity-Absolute- for this
 could never yield discrete plurality- it remains that they be
 derived from a unity Pluralized. But the creative principle [in
 bodies] is Soul: Soul therefore is a pluralized unity.
 
 We then ask whether the plurality here consists of the
 Reason-Principles of the things of process. Or is this unity not
 something different from the mere sum of these Principles? Certainly
 Soul itself is one Reason-Principle, the chief of the
 Reason-Principles, and these are its Act as it functions in 
 accordance
 with its essential being; this essential being, on the other hand,
 is the potentiality of the Reason-Principles. This is the mode in
 which this unity is a plurality, its plurality being revealed by the
 effect it has upon the external.
 
 But, to leave the region of its effect, suppose we take it at
 the higher non-effecting part of Soul; is not plurality of powers to
 be found in this part also? The existence of this higher 
 part will, we
 may presume, be at once conceded.
 
 But is this existence to be taken as identical with that of the
 stone? Surely not. Being in the case of the stone is not Being pure
 and simple, but stone-being: so here; Soul's being denotes not
 merely Being but Soul-being.
 
 Is then that "being" distinct from what else goes to complete
 the essence [or substance] of Soul? Is it to be identified with
 Bring [the Absolute], while to some differentia of Being is
 ascribed the production of Soul? No doubt Soul is in a sense Being,
 and this is not as a man "is" white, but from the fact of its being
 purely an essence: in other words, the being it possesses it holds
 from no source external to its own essence.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. But must it not draw on some source external to its 
 essence, if
 it is to be conditioned, not only by Being, but by being an entity
 of a particular character? But if it is conditioned by a particular
 character, and this character is external to its essence, its
 essence does not comprise all that makes it Soul; its individuality
 will determine it; a part of Soul will be essence, but not Soul
 entire.
 
 Furthermore, what being will it have when we separate it from
 its other components? The being of a stone? No: the being must be a
 form of Being appropriate to a source, so to speak, and a
 first-principle, or rather must take the forms appropriate 
 to all that
 is comprised in Soul's being: the being here must, that is, be life,
 and the life and the being must be one.
 
 One, in the sense of being one Reason-Principle? No; it is the
 substrate of Soul that is one, though one in such a way as to be
 also two or more- as many as are the Primaries which constitute
 Soul. Either, then, it is life as well as Substance, or else it
 possesses life.
 
 But if life is a thing possessed, the essence of the possessor
 is not inextricably bound up with life. If, on the contrary, this is
 not possession, the two, life and Substance, must be a unity.
 
 Soul, then, is one and many- as many as are manifested in that
 oneness- one in its nature, many in those other things. A single
 Existent, it makes itself many by what we may call its motion: it is
 one entire, but by its striving, so to speak, to contemplate itself,
 it is a plurality; for we may imagine that it cannot bear to be a
 single Existent, when it has the power to be all that it in fact is.
 The cause of its appearing as many is this contemplation, and its
 purpose is the Act of the Intellect; if it were manifested as a bare
 unity, it could have no intellection, since in that simplicity it
 would already be identical with the object of its thought.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. What, then, are the several entities observable in this
 plurality?
 
 We have found Substance [Essence] and life simultaneously
 present in Soul. Now, this Substance is a common property of 
 Soul, but
 life, common to all souls, differs in that it is a property of
 Intellect also.
 
 Having thus introduced Intellect and its life we make a single
 genus of what is common to all life, namely, Motion. 
 Substance and the
 Motion, which constitutes the highest life, we must consider as two
 genera; for even though they form a unity, they are separable to
 thought which finds their unity not a unity; otherwise, it could not
 distinguish them.
 
 Observe also how in other things Motion or life is clearly
 separated from Being- a separation impossible, doubtless, in True
 Being, but possible in its shadow and namesake. In the portrait of a
 man much is left out, and above all the essential thing, life: the
 "Being" of sensible things just such a shadow of True Being, an
 abstraction from that Being complete which was life in the
 Archetype; it is because of this incompleteness that we are able in
 the Sensible world to separate Being from life and life from Being.
 
 Being, then, containing many species, has but one genus. Motion,
 however, is to be classed as neither a subordinate nor a 
 supplement of
 Being but as its concomitant; for we have not found Being serving as
 substrate to Motion. Motion is being Act; neither is separated from
 the other except in thought; the two natures are one; for Being is
 inevitably actual, not potential.
 
 No doubt we observe Motion and Being separately, Motion as
 contained in Being and Being as involved in Motion, and in the
 individual they may be mutually exclusive; but the dualism is an
 affirmation of our thought only, and that thought sees either form
 as a duality within a unity.
 
 Now Motion, thus manifested in conjunction with Being, does not
 alter Being's nature- unless to complete its essential character-
 and it does retain for ever its own peculiar nature: at 
 once, then, we
 are forced to introduce Stability. To reject Stability would be more
 unreasonable than to reject Motion; for Stability is 
 associated in our
 thought and conception with Being even more than with Motion;
 unalterable condition, unchanging mode, single 
 Reason-Principle- these
 are characteristics of the higher sphere.
 
 Stability, then, may also be taken as a single genus. Obviously
 distinct from Motion and perhaps even its contrary, that it is also
 distinct from Being may be shown by many considerations. We may
 especially observe that if Stability were identical with Being, so
 also would Motion be, with equal right. Why identity in the case of
 Stability and not in that of Motion, when Motion is 
 virtually the very
 life and Act both of Substance and of Absolute Being? However, on
 the very same principle on which we separated Motion from Being with
 the understanding that it is the same and not the same- that they
 are two and yet one- we also separate Stability from Being, holding
 it, yet, inseparable; it is only a logical separation entailing the
 inclusion among the Existents of this other genus. To identify
 Stability with Being, with no difference between them, and 
 to identify
 Being with Motion, would be to identify Stability with Motion
 through the mediation of Being, and so to make Motion and Stability
 one and the same thing.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. We cannot indeed escape positing these three, Being, Motion,
 Stability, once it is the fact that the Intellect discerns them as
 separates; and if it thinks of them at all, it posits them by that
 very thinking; if they are thought, they exist. Things whose 
 existence
 is bound up with Matter have no being in the Intellect: these three
 principles are however free of Matter; and in that which goes free
 of Matter to be thought is to be.
 
 We are in the presence of Intellect undefiled. Fix it firmly,
 but not with the eyes of the body. You are looking upon the hearth
 of Reality, within it a sleepless light: you see how it holds to
 itself, and how it puts apart things that were together, how it
 lives a life that endures and keeps a thought acting not upon any
 future but upon that which already is, upon an eternal present- a
 thought self-centred, bearing on nothing outside of itself.
 
 Now in the Act of Intellect there are energy and motion; in its
 self-intellection Substance and Being. In virtue of its Being it
 thinks, and it thinks of itself as Being, and of that as Being, upon
 which it is, so to speak, pivoted. Not that its Act self-directed
 ranks as Substance, but Being stands as the goal and origin of that
 Act, the object of its contemplation though not the contemplation
 itself: and yet this Act too involves Being, which is its motive and
 its term. By the fact that its Being is actual and not merely
 potential, Intellect bridges the dualism [of agent and patient] and
 abjures separation: it identifies itself with Being and Being with
 itself.
 
 Being, the most firmly set of all things, that in virtue of
 which all other things receive Stability, possesses this 
 Stability not
 as from without but as springing within, as inherent. 
 Stability is the
 goal of intellection, a Stability which had no beginning, and the
 state from which intellection was impelled was Stability, though
 Stability gave it no impulsion; for Motion neither starts from
 Motion nor ends in Motion. Again, the Form-Idea has Stability, since
 it is the goal of Intellect: intellection is the Form's Motion.
 
 Thus all the Existents are one, at once Motion and Stability;
 Motion and Stability are genera all-pervading, and every 
 subsequent is
 a particular being, a particular stability and a particular motion.
 
 We have caught the radiance of Being, and beheld it in its three
 manifestations: Being, revealed by the Being within ourselves; the
 Motion of Being, revealed by the motion within ourselves; and its
 Stability revealed by ours. We accommodate our being, motion,
 stability to those [of the Archetypal], unable however to draw any
 distinction but finding ourselves in the presence of entities
 inseparable and, as it were, interfused. We have, however, 
 in a sense,
 set them a little apart, holding them down and viewing them in
 isolation; and thus we have observed Being, Stability, Motion- these
 three, of which each is a unity to itself; in so doing, have we not
 regarded them as being different from each other? By this posing of
 three entities, each a unity, we have, surely, found Being to
 contain Difference.
 
 Again, inasmuch as we restore them to an all-embracing unity,
 identifying all with unity, do we not see in this amalgamation
 Identity emerging as a Real Existent?
 
 Thus, in addition to the other three [Being, Motion, Stability],
 we are obliged to posit the further two, Identity and Difference, so
 that we have in all five genera. In so doing, we shall not withhold
 Identity and Difference from the subsequents of the Intellectual
 order; the thing of Sense has, it is clear, a particular identity
 and a particular difference, but Identity and Difference have the
 generic status independently of the particular.
 
 They will, moreover, be primary genera, because nothing can be
 predicated of them as denoting their essential nature. Nothing, of
 course we mean, but Being; but this Being is not their genus, since
 they cannot be identified with any particular being as such.
 Similarly, Being will not stand as genus to Motion or Stability, for
 these also are not its species. Beings [or Existents] comprise not
 merely what are to be regarded as species of the genus 
 Being, but also
 participants in Being. On the other hand, Being does not participate
 in the other four principles as its genera: they are not prior to
 Being; they do not even attain to its level.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. The above considerations- to which others, doubtless, might
 be added- suffice to show that these five are primary 
 genera. But that
 they are the only primary genera, that there are no others, 
 how can we
 be confident of this? Why do we not add unity to them? Quantity?
 Quality? Relation, and all else included by our various forerunners?
 
 As for unity: If the term is to mean a unity in which 
 nothing else
 is present, neither Soul nor Intellect nor anything else, this can
 be predicated of nothing, and therefore cannot be a genus. If it
 denotes the unity present in Being, in which case we predicate Being
 of unity, this unity is not primal.
 
 Besides, unity, containing no differences, cannot 
 produce species,
 and not producing species, cannot be a genus. You cannot so much as
 divide unity: to divide it would be to make it many. Unity, aspiring
 to be a genus, becomes a plurality and annuls itself.
 
 Again, you must add to it to divide it into species; for 
 there can
 be no differentiae in unity as there are in Substance. The mind
 accepts differences of Being, but differences within unity there
 cannot be. Every differentia introduces a duality destroying the
 unity; for the addition of any one thing always does away with the
 previous quantity.
 
 It may be contended that the unity which is implicit in Being
 and in Motion is common to all other things, and that therefore
 Being and unity are inseparable. But we rejected the idea that Being
 is a genus comprising all things, on the ground that these things
 are not beings in the sense of the Absolute Being, but beings in
 another mode: in the same way, we assert, unity is not a genus, the
 Primary Unity having a character distinct from all other unities.
 
 Admitted that not everything suffices to produce a genus, it may
 yet be urged that there is an Absolute or Primary Unity
 corresponding to the other primaries. But if Being and unity are
 identified, then since Being has already been included among the
 genera, it is but a name that is introduced in unity: if, however,
 they are both unity, some principle is implied: if there is anything
 in addition [to this principle], unity is predicated of this added
 thing; if there is nothing added, the reference is again to 
 that unity
 predicated of nothing. If however the unity referred to is that
 which accompanies Being, we have already decided that it is not
 unity in the primary sense.
 
 But is there any reason why this less complete unity should not
 still possess Primary Being, seeing that even its posterior 
 we rank as
 Being, and "Being" in the sense of the Primary Being? The reason is
 that the prior of this Being cannot itself be Being- or else, if the
 prior is Being, this is not Primary Being: but the prior is unity;
 [therefore unity is not Being].
 
 Furthermore, unity, abstracted from Being, has no differentiae.
 
 Again, even taking it as bound up with Being: If it is a
 consequent of Being, then it is a consequent of everything, and
 therefore the latest of things: but the genus takes 
 priority. If it is
 simultaneous with Being, it is simultaneous with everything: but a
 genus is not thus simultaneous. If it is prior to Being, it is of
 the nature of a Principle, and therefore will belong only to Being;
 but if it serves as Principle to Being, it is not its genus: if it
 is not genus to Being, it is equally not a genus of anything 
 else; for
 that would make Being a genus of all other things.
 
 In sum, the unity exhibited in Being on the one hand
 approximates to Unity-Absolute and on the other tends to identify
 itself with Being: Being is a unity in relation to the Absolute, is
 Being by virtue of its sequence upon that Absolute: it is indeed
 potentially a plurality, and yet it remains a unity and rejecting
 division refuses thereby to become a genus.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. In what sense is the particular manifestation of Being a
 unity? Clearly, in so far as it is one thing, it forfeits its unity;
 with "one" and "thing" we have already plurality. No species can be
 a unity in more than an equivocal sense: a species is a plurality,
 so that the "unity" here is that of an army or a chorus. The unity
 of the higher order does not belong to species; unity is, thus,
 ambiguous, not taking the same form in Being and in 
 particular beings.
 
 It follows that unity is not a genus. For a genus is such that
 wherever it is affirmed its opposites cannot also be affirmed;
 anything of which unity and its opposites are alike 
 affirmed- and this
 implies the whole of Being- cannot have unity as a genus. 
 Consequently
 unity can be affirmed as a genus neither of the primary genera-
 since the unity of Being is as much a plurality as a unity, and none
 of the other [primary] genera is a unity to the entire exclusion of
 plurality- nor of things posterior to Being, for these most
 certainly are a plurality. In fact, no genus with all its 
 items can be
 a unity; so that unity to become a genus must forfeit its unity. The
 unit is prior to number; yet number it must be, if it is to be a
 genus.
 
 Again, the unit is a unit from the point of view of number: if
 it is a unit generically, it will not be a unit in the strict sense.
 
 Again, just as the unit, appearing in numbers, not regarded as a
 genus predicated of them, but is thought of as inherent in them, so
 also unity, though present in Being, cannot stand as genus 
 to Being or
 to the other genera or to anything whatever.
 
 Further, as the simplex must be the principle of the
 non-simplex, though not its genus- for then the non-simplex too
 would be simplex,- so it stands with unity; if unity is a Principle;
 it cannot be a genus to its subsequents, and therefore cannot be a
 genus of Being or of other things. If it is nevertheless to be a
 genus, everything of which it is a genus must be taken as a unit- a
 notion which implies the separation of unity from substance: it will
 not, therefore, be all-embracing. just as Being is not a genus of
 everything but only of species each of which is a being, so too
 unity will be a genus of species each of which is a unity. But that
 raises the question of what difference there is between one thing
 and another in so far as they are both units, corresponding to the
 difference between one being and another.
 
 Unity, it may be suggested, is divided in its conjunction with
 Being and Substance; Being because it is so divided is considered a
 genus- the one genus manifested in many particulars; why then should
 not unity be similarly a genus, inasmuch as its manifestations are
 as many as those of Substance and it is divided into as many
 particulars?
 
 In the first place, the mere fact that an entity inheres in many
 things is not enough to make it a genus of those things or 
 of anything
 else: in a word, a common property need not be a genus. The point
 inherent in a line is not a genus of lines, or a genus at all; nor
 again, as we have observed, is the unity latent in numbers a genus
 either of the numbers or of anything else: genus demands that the
 common property of diverse objects involve also differences arising
 out of its own character, that it form species, and that it belong
 to the essence of the objects. But what differences can there be in
 unity? What species does it engender? If it produces the same
 species as we find in connection with Being, it must be 
 identical with
 Being: only the name will differ, and the term Being may 
 well suffice.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. We are bound however to enquire under what mode unity is
 contained in Being. How is what is termed the "dividing" effected-
 especially the dividing of the genera Being and unity? Is it the
 same division, or is it different in the two cases?
 
 First then: In what sense, precisely, is any given particular
 called and known to be a unity? Secondly: Does unity as used of
 Being carry the same connotation as in reference to the Absolute?
 
 Unity is not identical in all things; it has a different
 significance according as it is applied to the Sensible and the
 Intellectual realms- Being too, of course, comports such a 
 difference-
 and there is a difference in the unity affirmed among sensible
 things as compared with each other; the unity is not the same in the
 cases of chorus, camp, ship, house; there is a difference again as
 between such discrete things and the continuous. 
 Nevertheless, all are
 representations of the one exemplar, some quite remote, others more
 effective: the truer likeness is in the Intellectual; Soul 
 is a unity,
 and still more is Intellect a unity and Being a unity.
 
 When we predicate Being of a particular, do we thereby predicate
 of it unity, and does the degree of its unity tally with that of its
 being? Such correspondence is accidental: unity is not proportionate
 to Being; less unity need not mean less Being. An army or a choir
 has no less Being than a house, though less unity.
 
 It would appear, then, that the unity of a particular is related
 not so much to Being as to a standard of perfection: in so far as
 the particular attains perfection, so far it is a unity; and the
 degree of unity depends on this attainment. The particular 
 aspires not
 simply to Being, but to Being-in-perfection: it is in this strain
 towards their perfection that such beings as do not possess unity
 strive their utmost to achieve it.
 
 Things of nature tend by their very nature to coalesce with each
 other and also to unify each within itself; their movement 
 is not away
 from but towards each other and inwards upon themselves. Souls,
 moreover, seem to desire always to pass into a unity over and above
 the unity of their own substance. Unity in fact confronts them on
 two sides: their origin and their goal alike are unity; from unity
 they have arisen, and towards unity they strive. Unity is thus
 identical with Goodness [is the universal standard of 
 perfection]; for
 no being ever came into existence without possessing, from that very
 moment, an irresistible tendency towards unity.
 
 From natural things we turn to the artificial. Every art in all
 its operation aims at whatsoever unity its capacity and its models
 permit, though Being most achieves unity since it is closer at the
 start.
 
 That is why in speaking of other entities we assert the 
 name only,
 for example man; when we say "one man," we have in mind more 
 than one;
 and if we affirm unity of him in any other connection, we 
 regard it as
 supplementary [to his essence]: but when we speak of Being as a
 whole we say it is one Being without presuming that it is 
 anything but
 a unity; we thereby show its close association with Goodness.
 
 Thus for Being, as for the others, unity turns out to be, in
 some sense, Principle and Term, not however in the same sense as for
 things of the physical order- a discrepancy leading us to infer that
 even in unity there are degrees of priority.
 
 How, then, do we characterize the unity [thus diverse] in Being?
 Are we to think of it as a common property seen alike in all its
 parts? In the first place, the point is common to lines and 
 yet is not
 their genus, and this unity we are considering may also be common to
 numbers and not be their genus- though, we need hardly say, the
 unity of Unity-Absolute is not that of the numbers, one, two and the
 rest. Secondly, in Being there is nothing to prevent the existence
 of prior and posterior, simple and composite: but unity, 
 even if it be
 identical in all the manifestations of Being, having no
 differentiae can produce no species; but producing no species it
 cannot be a genus.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. Enough upon that side of the question. But how does the
 perfection [goodness] of numbers, lifeless things, depend upon their
 particular unity? Just as all other inanimates find their perfection
 in their unity.
 
 If it should be objected that numbers are simply non-existent,
 we should point out that our discussion is concerned [not with units
 as such, but] with beings considered from the aspect of their unity.
 
 We may again be asked how the point- supposing its independent
 existence granted- participates in perfection. If the point is
 chosen as an inanimate object, the question applies to all such
 objects: but perfection does exist in such things, for example in a
 circle: the perfection of the circle will be perfection for 
 the point;
 it will aspire to this perfection and strive to attain it, as far as
 it can, through the circle.
 
 But how are the five genera to be regarded? Do they form
 particulars by being broken up into parts? No; the genus exists as a
 whole in each of the things whose genus it is.
 
 But how, at that, can it remain a unity? The unity of a 
 genus must
 be considered as a whole-in-many.
 
 Does it exist then only in the things participating in it? No;
 it has an independent existence of its own as well. But this will,
 no doubt, become clearer as we proceed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. We turn to ask why Quantity is not included among the
 primary genera, and Quality also.
 
 Quantity is not among the primaries, because these are 
 permanently
 associated with Being. Motion is bound up with Actual Being
 [Being-in-Act], since it is its life; with Motion, Stability too
 gained its foothold in Reality; with these are associated Difference
 and Identity, so that they also are seen in conjunction with Being.
 But number [the basis of Quantity] is a posterior. It is 
 posterior not
 only with regard to these genera but also within itself; in 
 number the
 posterior is divided from the prior; this is a sequence in which the
 posteriors are latent in the priors [and do not appear
 simultaneously]. Number therefore cannot be included among 
 the primary
 genera; whether it constitutes a genus at all remains to be examined.
 
 Magnitude [extended quantity] is in a still higher degree
 posterior and composite, for it contains within itself number, line
 and surface. Now if continuous magnitude derives its quantity from
 number, and number is not a genus, how can magnitude hold 
 that status?
 Besides, magnitudes, like numbers, admit of priority and 
 posteriority.
 
 If, then, Quantity be constituted by a common element in both
 number and magnitude, we must ascertain the nature of this common
 element, and consider it, once discovered, as a posterior genus, not
 as one of the Primaries: thus failing of primary status, it must be
 related, directly or indirectly, to one of the Primaries.
 
 We may take it as clear that it is the nature of Quantity to
 indicate a certain quantum, and to measure the quantum of the
 particular; Quantity is moreover, in a sense, itself a 
 quantum. But if
 the quantum is the common element in number and magnitude, either we
 have number as a primary with magnitude derived from it, or else
 number must consist of a blending of Motion and Stability, while
 magnitude will be a form of Motion or will originate in 
 Motion, Motion
 going forth to infinity and Stability creating the unit by checking
 that advance.
 
 But the problem of the origin of number and magnitude, or rather
 of how they subsist and are conceived, must be held over. It may,
 thus, be found that number is among the primary genera, while
 magnitude is posterior and composite; or that number belongs to the
 genus Stability, while magnitude must be consigned to Motion. But we
 propose to discuss all this at a later stage.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. Why is Quality, again, not included among the Primaries?
 Because like Quantity it is a posterior, subsequent to Substance.
 Primary Substance must necessarily contain Quantity and 
 Quality as its
 consequents; it cannot owe its subsistence to them, or require them
 for its completion: that would make it posterior to Quality and
 Quantity.
 
 Now in the case of composite substances- those constituted from
 diverse elements- number and qualities provide a means of
 differentiation: the qualities may be detached from the common core
 around which they are found to group themselves. But in the primary
 genera there is no distinction to be drawn between simples and
 composites; the difference is between simples and those 
 entities which
 complete not a particular substance but Substance as such. A
 particular substance may very well receive completion from Quality,
 for though it already has Substance before the accession of Quality,
 its particular character is external to Substance. But in Substance
 itself all the elements are substantial.
 
 Nevertheless, we ventured to assert elsewhere that while the
 complements of Substance are only by analogy called qualities, yet
 accessions of external origin and subsequent to Substance are really
 qualities; that, further, the properties which inhere in substances
 are their activities [Acts], while those which are subsequent are
 merely modifications [or Passions]: we now affirm that the
 attributes of the particular substance are never complementary to
 Substance [as such]; an accession of Substance does not come to the
 substance of man qua man; he is, on the contrary, Substance in a
 higher degree before he arrives at differentiation, just as he is
 already "living being" before he passes into the rational species.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. How then do the four genera complete Substance without
 qualifying it or even particularizing it?
 
 It has been observed that Being is primary, and it is clear that
 none of the four- Motion, Stability, Difference, Identity- 
 is distinct
 from it. That this Motion does not produce Quality is doubtless also
 clear, but a word or two will make it clearer still.
 
 If Motion is the Act of Substance, and Being and the Primaries
 in general are its Act, then Motion is not an accidental 
 attribute: as
 the Act of what is necessarily actual [what necessarily 
 involves Act],
 it is no longer to be considered as the complement of 
 Substance but as
 Substance itself. For this reason, then, it has not been 
 assigned to a
 posterior class, or referred to Quality, but has been made
 contemporary with Being.
 
 The truth is not that Being first is and then takes Motion,
 first is and then acquires Stability: neither Stability nor Motion
 is a mere modification of Being. Similarly, Identity and Difference
 are not later additions: Being did not grow into plurality; its very
 unity was a plurality; but plurality implies Difference, and
 unity-in-plurality involves Identity.
 
 Substance [Real Being] requires no more than these five
 constituents; but when we have to turn to the lower sphere, we find
 other principles giving rise no longer to Substance (as such) but to
 quantitative Substance and qualitative: these other principles may
 be regarded as genera but not primary genera.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. As for Relation, manifestly an offshoot, how can it be
 included among primaries? Relation is of thing ranged against thing;
 it is not self-pivoted, but looks outward.
 
 Place and Date are still more remote from Being. Place 
 denotes the
 presence of one entity within another, so that it involves a
 duality; but a genus must be a unity, not a composite. Besides,
 Place does not exist in the higher sphere, and the present
 discussion is concerned with the realm of True Being.
 
 Whether time is There, remains to be considered. 
 Apparently it has
 less claim than even Place. If it is a measurement, and that a
 measurement of Motion, we have two entities; the whole is a
 composite and posterior to Motion; therefore it is not on an equal
 footing with Motion in our classification.
 
 Action and Passivity presuppose Motion; if, then, they exist in
 the higher sphere, they each involve a duality; neither is a simplex.
 
 Possession is a duality, while Situation, as signifying one
 thing situated in another, is a threefold conception.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. Why are not beauty, goodness and the virtues, together with
 knowledge and intelligence, included among the primary genera?
 
 If by goodness we mean The First- what we call the Principle of
 Goodness, the Principle of which we can predicate nothing, giving it
 this name only because we have no other means of indicating it- then
 goodness, clearly, can be the genus of nothing: this principle is
 not affirmed of other things; if it were, each of these would be
 Goodness itself. The truth is that it is prior to Substance, not
 contained in it. If, on the contrary, we mean goodness as a quality,
 no quality can be ranked among the primaries.
 
 Does this imply that the nature of Being is not good? 
 Not good, to
 begin with, in the sense in which The First is good, but in another
 sense of the word: moreover, Being does not possess its goodness as
 a quality but as a constituent.
 
 But the other genera too, we said, are constituents of Being,
 and are regarded as genera because each is a common property found
 in many things. If then goodness is similarly observed in every part
 of Substance or Being, or in most parts, why is goodness not a
 genus, and a primary genus? Because it is not found identical in all
 the parts of Being, but appears in degrees, first, second and
 subsequent, whether it be because one part is derived from another-
 posterior from prior- or because all are posterior to the 
 transcendent
 Unity, different parts of Being participating in it in 
 diverse degrees
 corresponding to their characteristic natures.
 
 If however we must make goodness a genus as well [as a
 transcendent source], it will be a posterior genus, for goodness is
 posterior to Substance and posterior to what constitutes the generic
 notion of Being, however unfailingly it be found associated with
 Being; but the Primaries, we decided, belong to Being as such, and
 go to form Substance.
 
 This indeed is why we posit that which transcends Being, since
 Being and Substance cannot but be a plurality, necessarily
 comprising the genera enumerated and therefore forming a 
 one-and-many.
 
 It is true that we do not hesitate to speak of the goodness
 inherent in Being" when we are thinking of that Act by which Being
 tends, of its nature, towards the One: thus, we affirm goodness of
 it in the sense that it is thereby moulded into the likeness of The
 Good. But if this "goodness inherent in Being" is an Act directed
 toward The Good, it is the life of Being: but this life is 
 Motion, and
 Motion is already one of the genera.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. To pass to the consideration of beauty:
 
 If by beauty we mean the primary Beauty, the same or similar
 arguments will apply here as to goodness: and if the beauty in the
 Ideal-Form is, as it were, an effulgence [from that primary Beauty],
 we may observe that it is not identical in all participants and that
 an effulgence is necessarily a posterior.
 
 If we mean the beauty which identifies itself with 
 Substance, this
 has been covered in our treatment of Substance.
 
 If, again, we mean beauty in relation to ourselves as spectators
 in whom it produces a certain experience, this Act [of production]
 is Motion- and none the less Motion by being directed 
 towards Absolute
 Beauty.
 
 Knowledge again, is Motion originating in the self; it is the
 observation of Being- an Act, not a State: hence it too falls under
 Motion, or perhaps more suitably under Stability, or even under
 both; if under both, knowledge must be thought of as a 
 complex, and if
 a complex, is posterior.
 
 Intelligence, since it connotes intelligent Being and comprises
 the total of existence, cannot be one of the genera: the true
 Intelligence [or Intellect] is Being taken with all its concomitants
 [with the other four genera]; it is actually the sum of all the
 Existents: Being on the contrary, stripped of its 
 concomitants, may be
 counted as a genus and held to an element in Intelligence.
 
 Justice and self-control [sophrosyne], and virtue in general-
 these are all various Acts of Intelligence: they are consequently
 not primary genera; they are posterior to a genus, that is to say,
 they are species.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 19
 
 19. Having established our four primary genera, it remains for
 us to enquire whether each of them of itself alone produces species.
 And especially, can Being be divided independently, that is without
 drawing upon the other genera? Surely not: the differentiae must come
 from outside the genus differentiated: they must be differentiae of
 Being proper, but cannot be identical with it.
 
 Where then is it to find them? Obviously not in non-beings. If
 then in beings, and the three genera are all that is left, clearly
 it must find them in these, by conjunction and couplement with
 these, which will come into existence simultaneously with itself.
 
 But if all come into existence simultaneously, what else is
 produced but that amalgam of all Existents which we have just
 considered [Intellect]? How can other things exist over and 
 above this
 all-including amalgam? And if all the constituents of this 
 amalgam are
 genera, how do they produce species? How does Motion produce species
 of Motion? Similarly with Stability and the other genera.
 
 A word of warning must here be given against sinking the various
 genera in their species; and also against reducing the genus 
 to a mere
 predicate, something merely seen in the species. The genus must
 exist at once in itself and in its species; it blends, but it must
 also be pure; in contributing along with other genera to form
 Substance, it must not destroy itself. There are problems here that
 demand investigation.
 
 But since we identified the amalgam of the Existents [or primary
 genera] with the particular intellect, Intellect as such being found
 identical with Being or Substance, and therefore prior to all the
 Existents, which may be regarded as its species or members, we may
 infer that the intellect, considered as completely unfolded, is a
 subsequent.
 
 Our treatment of this problem may serve to promote our
 investigation; we will take it as a kind of example, and with it
 embark upon our enquiry.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 20
 
 20. We may thus distinguish two phases of Intellect, in one of
 which it may be taken as having no contact whatever with particulars
 and no Act upon anything; thus it is kept apart from being a
 particular intellect. In the same way science is prior to any of its
 constituent species, and the specific science is prior to any of its
 component parts: being none of its particulars, it is the 
 potentiality
 of all; each particular, on the other hand, is actually itself, but
 potentially the sum of all the particulars: and as with the specific
 science, so with science as a whole. The specific sciences lie in
 potentiality in science the total; even in their specific character
 they are potentially the whole; they have the whole 
 predicated of them
 and not merely a part of the whole. At the same time, science must
 exist as a thing in itself, unharmed by its divisions.
 
 So with Intellect. Intellect as a whole must be thought of as
 prior to the intellects actualized as individuals; but when 
 we come to
 the particular intellects, we find that what subsists in the
 particulars must be maintained from the totality. The Intellect
 subsisting in the totality is a provider for the particular
 intellects, is the potentiality of them: it involves them as members
 of its universality, while they in turn involve the universal
 Intellect in their particularity, just as the particular science
 involves science the total.
 
 The great Intellect, we maintain, exists in itself and the
 particular intellects in themselves; yet the particulars are
 embraced in the whole, and the whole in the particulars. The
 particular intellects exist by themselves and in another, the
 universal by itself and in those. All the particulars exist
 potentially in that self-existent universal, which actually is the
 totality, potentially each isolated member: on the other hand, each
 particular is actually what it is [its individual self], potentially
 the totality. In so far as what is predicated of them is their
 essence, they are actually what is predicated of them; but where the
 predicate is a genus, they are that only potentially. On the other
 hand, the universal in so far as it is a genus is the potentiality
 of all its subordinate species, though none of them in actuality;
 all are latent in it, but because its essential nature exists in
 actuality before the existence of the species, it does not submit to
 be itself particularized. If then the particulars are to exist in
 actuality- to exist, for example, as species- the cause must lie in
 the Act radiating from the universal.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 21
 
 21. How then does the universal Intellect produce the
 particulars while, in virtue of its Reason-Principle, remaining a
 unity? In other words, how do the various grades of Being, as we
 call them, arise from the four primaries? Here is this great, this
 infinite Intellect, not given to idle utterance but to sheer
 intellection, all-embracing, integral, no part, no 
 individual: how, we
 ask, can it possibly be the source of all this plurality?
 
 Number at all events it possesses in the objects of its
 contemplation: it is thus one and many, and the many are powers,
 wonderful powers, not weak but, being pure, supremely great 
 and, so to
 speak, full to overflowing powers in very truth, knowing no limit,
 so that they are infinite, infinity, Magnitude-Absolute.
 
 As we survey this Magnitude with the beauty of Being 
 within it and
 the glory and light around it, all contained in Intellect, we see,
 simultaneously, Quality already in bloom, and along with the
 continuity of its Act we catch a glimpse of Magnitude at Rest. Then,
 with one, two and three in Intellect, Magnitude appears as of three
 dimensions, with Quantity entire. Quantity thus given and Quality,
 both merging into one and, we may almost say, becoming one, there is
 at once shape. Difference slips in to divide both Quantity and
 Quality, and so we have variations in shape and differences of
 Quality. Identity, coming in with Difference, creates equality,
 Difference meanwhile introducing into Quantity inequality, whether
 in number or in magnitude: thus are produced circles and squares,
 and irregular figures, with number like and unlike, odd and even.
 
 The life of Intellect is intelligent, and its activity [Act] has
 no failing-point: hence it excludes none of the constituents we have
 discovered within it, each one of which we now see as an
 intellectual function, and all of them possessed by virtue of its
 distinctive power and in the mode appropriate to Intellect.
 
 But though Intellect possesses them all by way of 
 thought, this is
 not discursive thought: nothing it lacks that is capable of 
 serving as
 Reason-Principle, while it may itself be regarded as one great and
 perfect Reason-Principle, holding all the Principles as one and
 proceeding from its own Primaries, or rather having eternally
 proceeded, so that "proceeding" is never true of it. It is a 
 universal
 rule that whatever reasoning discovers to exist in Nature is to be
 found in Intellect apart from all ratiocination: we conclude that
 Being has so created Intellect that its reasoning is after a mode
 similar to that of the Principles which produce living 
 beings; for the
 Reason-Principles, prior to reasoning though they are, act
 invariably in the manner which the most careful reasoning would
 adopt in order to attain the best results.
 
 What conditions, then, are we to think of as existing in that
 realm which is prior to Nature and transcends the Principles of
 Nature? In a sphere in which Substance is not distinct from 
 Intellect,
 and neither Being nor Intellect is of alien origin, it is 
 obvious that
 Being is best served by the domination of Intellect, so that Being
 is what Intellect wills and is: thus alone can it be authentic and
 primary Being; for if Being is to be in any sense derived, its
 derivation must be from Intellect.
 
 Being, thus, exhibits every shape and every quality; it is not
 seen as a thing determined by some one particular quality; 
 there could
 not be one only, since the principle of Difference is there; 
 and since
 Identity is equally there, it must be simultaneously one and 
 many. And
 so Being is; such it always was: unity-with-plurality appears in all
 its species, as witness all the variations of magnitude, shape and
 quality. Clearly nothing may legitimately be excluded [from Being],
 for the whole must be complete in the higher sphere which,
 otherwise, would not be the whole.
 
 Life, too, burst upon Being, or rather was inseparably bound up
 with it; and thus it was that all living things of necessity came to
 be. Body too was there, since Matter and Quality were present.
 
 Everything exists forever, unfailing, involved by very existence
 in eternity. Individuals have their separate entities, but are at
 one in the [total] unity. The complex, so to speak, of them all,
 thus combined, is Intellect; and Intellect, holding all existence
 within itself, is a complete living being, and the essential Idea of
 Living Being. In so far as Intellect submits to contemplation by its
 derivative, becoming an Intelligible, it gives that derivative the
 right also to be called "living being."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 22
 
 22. We may here adduce the pregnant words of Plato: "Inasmuch as
 Intellect perceives the variety and plurality of the Forms present
 in the complete Living Being...." The words apply equally to Soul;
 Soul is subsequent to Intellect, yet by its very nature it involves
 Intellect in itself and perceives more clearly in that 
 prior. There is
 Intellect in our intellect also, which again perceives more 
 clearly in
 its prior, for while of itself it merely perceives, in the prior it
 also perceives its own perception.
 
 This intellect, then, to which we ascribe perception, though not
 divorced from the prior in which it originates, evolves plurality
 out of unity and has bound up with it the principle of Difference:
 it therefore takes the form of a plurality-in-unity. A
 plurality-in-unity, it produces the many intellects by the dictate
 of its very nature.
 
 It is certainly no numerical unity, no individual thing; for
 whatever you find in that sphere is a species, since it is divorced
 from Matter. This may be the import of the difficult words of Plato,
 that Substance is broken up into an infinity of parts. So long as
 the division proceeds from genus to species, infinity is not
 reached; a limit is set by the species generated: the lowest
 species, however- that which is not divided into further species-
 may be more accurately regarded as infinite. And this is the meaning
 of the words: "to relegate them once and for all to infinity 
 and there
 abandon them." As for particulars, they are, considered in 
 themselves,
 infinite, but come under number by being embraced by the [total]
 unity.
 
 Now Soul has Intellect for its prior, is therefore circumscribed
 by number down to its ultimate extremity; at that point infinity is
 reached. The particular intellect, though all-embracing, is a
 partial thing, and the collective Intellect and its various
 manifestations [all the particular intellects] are in actuality
 parts of that part. Soul too is a part of a part, though in the
 sense of being an Act [actuality] derived from it. When the Act of
 Intellect is directed upon itself, the result is the manifold
 [particular] intellects; when it looks outwards, Soul is produced.
 
 If Soul acts as a genus or a species, the various [particular]
 souls must act as species. Their activities [Acts] will be twofold:
 the activity upward is Intellect; that which looks downward
 constitutes the other powers imposed by the particular
 Reason-Principle [the Reason-Principle of the being ensouled]; the
 lowest activity of Soul is in its contact with Matter to which it
 brings Form.
 
 This lower part of Soul does not prevent the rest from being
 entirely in the higher sphere: indeed what we call the lower part is
 but an image of Soul: not that it is cut off from Soul; it 
 is like the
 reflection in the mirror, depending upon the original which stands
 outside of it.
 
 But we must keep in mind what this "outside" means. Up to the
 production of the image, the Intellectual realm is wholly and
 exclusively composed of Intellectual Beings: in the same way the
 Sensible world, representing that in so far as it is able to retain
 the likeness of a living being, is itself a living being: 
 the relation
 is like that of a portrait or reflection to the original which is
 regarded as prior to the water or the painting reproducing it.
 
 The representation, notice, in the portrait or on the 
 water is not
 of the dual being, but of the one element [Matter] as formed by the
 other [Soul]. Similarly, this likeness of the Intellectual realm
 carries images, not of the creative element, but of the entities
 contained in that creator, including Man with every other living
 being: creator and created are alike living beings, though of a
 different life, and both coexist in the Intellectual realm.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 THIRD TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON THE KINDS OF BEING (3).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. We have now explained our conception of Reality [True Being]
 and considered how far it agrees with the teaching of Plato. We have
 still to investigate the opposed principle [the principle of
 Becoming].
 
 There is the possibility that the genera posited for the
 Intellectual sphere will suffice for the lower also; possibly with
 these genera others will be required; again, the two series 
 may differ
 entirely; or perhaps some of the sensible genera will be identical
 with their intellectual prototypes, and others different- 
 "identical,"
 however, being understood to mean only analogous and in possession
 of a common name, as our results will make dear.
 
 We must begin on these lines:
 
 The subject of our discussion is the Sensible realm: Sensible
 Existence is entirely embraced by what we know as the Universe: our
 duty, then, would seem to be clear enough- to take this Universe and
 analyse its nature, classifying its constituent parts and arranging
 them by species. Suppose that we were making a division of speech:
 we should reduce its infinity to finite terms, and from the identity
 appearing in many instances evolve a unity, then another and
 another, until we arrived at some definite number; each such unit we
 should call a species if imposed upon individuals, a genus if
 imposed upon species. Thus, every species of speech- and 
 similarly all
 phenomena- might be referred to a unity; speech- or element- might
 be predicated of them all.
 
 This procedure however is as we have already shown, impossible
 in dealing with the subject of our present enquiry. New 
 genera must be
 sought for this Universe-genera distinct from those of the
 Intellectual, inasmuch as this realm is different from that, 
 analogous
 indeed but never identical, a mere image of the higher. True, it
 involves the parallel existence of Body and Soul, for the Universe
 is a living form: essentially however Soul is of the Intellectual
 and does not enter into the structure of what is called Sensible
 Being.
 
 Remembering this fact, we must- however great the difficulty-
 exclude Soul from the present investigation, just as in a census of
 citizens, taken in the interests of commerce and taxation, we should
 ignore the alien population. As for the experiences to which Soul is
 indirectly subject in its conjunction with Body and by reason of
 Body's presence, their classification must be attempted at a later
 stage, when we enquire into the details of Sensible Existence.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Our first observations must be directed to what passes in the
 Sensible realm for Substance. It is, we shall agree, only by analogy
 that the nature manifested in bodies is designated as Substance, and
 by no means because such terms as Substance or Being tally with the
 notion of bodies in flux; the proper term would be Becoming.
 
 But Becoming is not a uniform nature; bodies comprise under the
 single head simples and composites, together with accidentals or
 consequents, these last themselves capable of separate 
 classification.
 
 Alternatively, Becoming may be divided into Matter and the Form
 imposed upon Matter. These may be regarded each as a separate genus,
 or else both may be brought under a single category and receive
 alike the name of Substance.
 
 But what, we may ask, have Matter and Form in common? In what
 sense can Matter be conceived as a genus, and what will be its
 species? What is the differentia of Matter? In which genus, Matter or
 Form, are we to rank the composite of both? It may be this very
 composite which constitutes the Substance manifested in bodies,
 neither of the components by itself answering to the conception of
 Body: how, then, can we rank them in one and the same genus as the
 composite? How can the elements of a thing be brought within the
 same genus as the thing itself? Yet if we begin with bodies, our
 first-principles will be compounds.
 
 Why not resort to analogy? Admitted that the 
 classification of the
 Sensible cannot proceed along the identical lines marked out for the
 Intellectual: is there any reason why we should not for
 Intellectual-Being substitute Matter, and for Intellectual Motion
 substitute Sensible Form, which is in a sense the life and
 consummation of Matter? The inertia of Matter would correspond with
 Stability, while the Identity and Difference of the 
 Intellectual would
 find their counterparts in the similarity and diversity which obtain
 in the Sensible realm.
 
 But, in the first place, Matter does not possess or acquire Form
 as its life or its Act; Form enters it from without, and remains
 foreign to its nature. Secondly, Form in the Intellectual is an Act
 and a motion; in the Sensible Motion is different from Form and
 accidental to it: Form in relation to Matter approximates rather to
 Stability than to Motion; for by determining Matter's
 indetermination it confers upon it a sort of repose.
 
 In the higher realm Identity and Difference presuppose a unity
 at once identical and different: a thing in the lower is different
 only by participation in Difference and in relation to some other
 thing; Identity and Difference are here predicated of the
 particular, which is not, as in that realm, a posterior.
 
 As for Stability, how can it belong to Matter, which is
 distorted into every variety of mass, receiving its forms from
 without, and even with the aid of these forms incapable of offspring.
 
 This mode of division must accordingly be abandoned.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. How then do we go to work?
 
 Let us begin by distinguishing Matter, Form, the Mixture of
 both, and the Attributes of the Mixture. The Attributes may be
 subdivided into those which are mere predicates, and those serving
 also as accidents. The accidents may be either inclusive or
 included; they may, further, be classified as activities, 
 experiences,
 consequents.
 
 Matter will be found common to all substances, not however as a
 genus, since it has no differentiae- unless indeed differentiae be
 ascribed to it on the ground of its taking such various forms as
 fire and air.
 
 It may be held that Matter is sufficiently constituted a genus
 by the fact that the things in which it appears hold it in common,
 or in that it presents itself as a whole of parts. In this sense
 Matter will indeed be a genus, though not in the accepted 
 sense of the
 term. Matter, we may remark, is also a single element, if the
 element as such is able to constitute a genus.
 
 Further, if to a Form be added the qualification "bound up with,
 involved in Matter," Matter separates that Form from other Forms: it
 does not however embrace the whole of Substantial Form [as, to be
 the genus of Form, it must].
 
 We may, again, regard Form as the creator of Substance and make
 the Reason-Principle of Substance dependent upon Form: yet we do not
 come thereby to an understanding of the nature of Substance.
 
 We may, also, restrict Substance to the Composite. 
 Matter and Form
 then cease to be substances. If they are Substance equally with the
 Composite, it remains to enquire what there is common to all three.
 
 The "mere predicates" fall under the category of Relation: such
 are cause and element. The accidents included in the composite
 substances ire found to be either Quality or Quantity; those 
 which are
 inclusive are of the nature of Space and Time. Activities and
 experiences comprise Motions; consequents Space and Time, which are
 consequents respectively of the Composites and of Motion.
 
 The first three entities [Matter, Form, Composite] go, as we
 have discovered, to make a single common genus, the Sensible
 counterpart of Substance. Then follow in order Relation, Quantity,
 Quality, Time-during-which, Place-in-which, Motion; though, with
 Time and Space already included [under Relation], Time-during-which
 and Place-in-which become superfluous.
 
 Thus we have five genera, counting the first three entities as
 one. If the first three are not massed into a unity, the series will
 be Matter, Form, Composite, Relation, Quantity, Quality, Motion. The
 last three may, again, be included in Relation, which is capable of
 bearing this wider extension.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. What, then, we have to ask, is the constant element in the
 first three entities? What is it that identifies them with their
 inherent Substance?
 
 Is it the capacity to serve as a base? But Matter, we maintain,
 serves as the base and seat of Form: Form, thus, will be 
 excluded from
 the category of Substance. Again, the Composite is the base and seat
 of attributes: hence, Form combined with Matter will be the basic
 ground of Composites, or at any rate of all posteriors of the
 Composite- Quantity, Quality, Motion, and the rest.
 
 But perhaps we may think Substance validly defined as that which
 is not predicated of anything else. White and black are predicated
 of an object having one or other of these qualities; double
 presupposes something distinct from itself- we refer not to the
 half, but to the length of wood of which doubleness is affirmed.
 father qua father is a predicate; knowledge is predicated of the
 subject in whom the knowledge exists; space is the limit of 
 something,
 time the measure of something. Fire, on the other hand, is
 predicated of nothing; wood as such is predicated of nothing; and so
 with man, Socrates, and the composite substance in general.
 
 Equally the Substantial Form is never a predicate, since it
 never acts as a modification of anything. Form is not an attribute
 of Matter hence, is not predicable of Matter it is simply a
 constituent of the Couplement. On the other hand, the Form 
 of a man is
 not different from the man himself [and so does not "modify" the
 Couplement].
 
 Matter, similarly, is part of a whole, and belongs to something
 else only as to a whole and not as to a separate thing of which it
 is predicated. White, on the contrary, essentially belongs to
 something distinct from itself.
 
 We conclude that nothing belonging to something else and
 predicated of it can be Substance. Substance is that which belongs
 essentially to itself, or, in so far as it is a part of the
 differentiated object, serves only to complete the Composite. Each
 or either part of the Composite belongs to itself, and is only
 affirmed of the Composite in a special sense: only qua part of the
 whole is it predicated of something else; qua individual it is never
 in its essential nature predicated of an external.
 
 It may be claimed as a common element in Matter, Form and the
 Couplement that they are all substrates. But the mode in which
 Matter is the substrate of Form is different from that in which Form
 and the Couplement are substrates of their modifications.
 
 And is it strictly true to say that Matter is the substrate of
 Form? Form is rather the completion which Matter's nature as pure
 potentiality demands.
 
 Moreover, Form cannot be said to reside in Matter [as in a
 substrate]. When one thing combines with another to form a unity,
 the one does not reside in the other; both alike are substrates of a
 third: thus, Man [the Form] and a man [the Composite] are substrates
 of their experiences, and are prior to their activities and
 consequents.
 
 Substance, then, is that from which all other things proceed and
 to which they owe their existence; it is the centre of passivity and
 the source of action.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. These are incontrovertible facts in regard to the
 pseudo-substance of the Sensible realm: if they apply also in some
 degree to the True Substance of the Intellectual, the coincidence
 is, doubtless, to be attributed to analogy and ambiguity of terms.
 
 We are aware that "the first" is so called only in 
 relation to the
 things which come after it: "first" has no absolute significance;
 the first of one series is subsequent to the last of another.
 "Substrate," similarly, varies in meaning [as applied to the higher
 and to the lower], while as for passivity its very existence in the
 Intellectual is questionable; if it does exist there, it is not the
 passivity of the Sensible.
 
 It follows that the fact of "not being present in a subject [or
 substrate] is not universally true of Substance, unless presence in
 a subject be stipulated as not including the case of the part
 present in the whole or of one thing combining with another to form
 a distinct unity; a thing will not be present as in a subject in
 that with which it co-operates in the information of a composite
 substance. Form, therefore, is not present in Matter as in a
 subject, nor is Man so present in Socrates, since Man is part of
 Socrates.
 
 Substance, then, is that which is not present in a 
 subject. But if
 we adopt the definition "neither present in a subject nor predicated
 of a subject," we must add to the second "subject" the qualification
 "distinct," in order that we may not exclude the case of Man
 predicated of a particular man. When I predicate Man of Socrates, it
 is as though I affirmed, not that a piece of wood is white, but that
 whiteness is white; for in asserting that Socrates is a man, I
 predicate Man [the universal] of a particular man, I affirm 
 Man of the
 manhood in Socrates; I am really saying only that Socrates is
 Socrates, or that this particular rational animal is an animal.
 
 It may be objected that non-presence in a subject is not
 peculiar to Substance, inasmuch as the differentia of a substance
 is no more present in a subject than the substance itself; but this
 objection results from taking a part of the whole substance, such as
 "two-footed" in our example, and asserting that this part is not
 present in a subject: if we take, not "two-footed" which is merely
 an aspect of Substance, but "two-footedness" by which we signify not
 Substance but Quality, we shall find that this "two-footedness" is
 indeed present in a subject.
 
 We may be told that neither Time nor Place is present in a
 subject. But if the definition of Time as the measure of Motion be
 regarded as denoting something measured, the "measure" will 
 be present
 in Motion as in a subject, while Motion will be present in the
 moved: if, on the contrary, it be supposed to signify a principle of
 measurement, the "measure" will be present in the measurer.
 
 Place is the limit of the surrounding space, and thus is present
 in that space.
 
 The truth is, however, that the "Substance" of our enquiry may
 be apprehended in directly opposite ways: it may be determined by
 one of the properties we have been discussing, by more than one, by
 all at once, according as they answer to the notions of Matter, Form
 and the Couplement.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. Granted, it may be urged, that these observations upon the
 nature of Substance are sound, we have not yet arrived at a
 statement of its essence. Our critic doubtless expects to see this
 "Sensible": but its essence, its characteristic being, 
 cannot be seen.
 
 Do we infer that fire and water are not Substance? They
 certainly are not Substance because they are visible. Why, then?
 Because they possess Matter? No. Or Form? No. Nor because 
 they involve
 a Couplement of Matter and Form. Then why are they Substance? By
 existing. But does not Quantity exist, and Quality? This 
 anomaly is to
 be explained by an equivocation in the term "existence."
 
 What, then, is the meaning of "existence" as applied to fire,
 earth and the other elements? What is the difference between this
 existence and existence in the other categories? It is the
 difference between being simply- that which merely is- and being
 white. But surely the being qualified by "white" is the same as that
 having no qualification? It is not the same: the latter is Being in
 the primary sense, the former is Being only by participation and in
 a secondary degree. Whiteness added to Being produces a being white;
 Being added to whiteness produces a white being: thus, whiteness
 becomes an accident of Being, and Being an accident of whiteness.
 
 The case is not equivalent to predicating white of Socrates and
 Socrates of white: for Socrates remains the same, though white would
 appear to have a different meaning in the two propositions, since in
 predicating Socrates of white we include Socrates in the [whole]
 sphere of whiteness, whereas in the proposition "Socrates is white"
 whiteness is plainly an attribute of Socrates.
 
 "Being is white" implies, similarly, that Being possesses
 whiteness as an attribute, while in the proposition "whiteness is
 Being [or, is a being]" Being is regarded as comprising whiteness in
 its own extension.
 
 In sum, whiteness has existence because it is bound up with
 Being and present in it: Being is, thus, the source of its
 existence. Being is Being on its own account, but the white is due
 to whiteness- not because it is "present in" whiteness, but because
 whiteness is present in it.
 
 The Being of the Sensible resembles the white in not originating
 in itself. It must therefore be regarded as dependent for its being
 upon the Authentic Being, as white is dependent upon the Authentic
 Whiteness, and the Authentic Whiteness dependent for its whiteness
 upon participation in that Supreme Being whose existence is 
 underived.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. But Matter, it may be contended, is the source of existence
 to the Sensible things implanted in it. From what source, then, we
 retort, does Matter itself derive existence and being?
 
 That Matter is not a Primary we have established elsewhere. If
 it be urged that other things can have no subsistence without being
 implanted in Matter, we admit the claim for Sensible things. But
 though Matter be prior to these, it is not thereby precluded from
 being posterior to many things-posterior, in fact, to all the beings
 of the Intellectual sphere. Its existence is but a pale reflection,
 and less complete than that of the things implanted in it. These are
 Reason-Principles and more directly derived from Being: Matter has
 of itself no Reason-Principle whatever; it is but a shadow of a
 Principle, a vain attempt to achieve a Principle.
 
 But, our critic may pursue, Matter gives existence to the things
 implanted in it, just as Socrates gives existence to the whiteness
 implanted in himself? We reply that the higher being gives existence
 to the lower, the lower to the higher never.
 
 But once concede that Form is higher in the scale of Being than
 Matter, and Matter can no longer be regarded as a common ground of
 both, nor Substance as a genus embracing Matter, Form and the
 Couplement. True, these will have many common properties, to which
 we have already referred, but their being [or existence] will
 nonetheless be different. When a higher being comes into contact
 with a lower, the lower, though first in the natural order, is yet
 posterior in the scale of Reality: consequently, if Being does not
 belong in equal degrees to Matter, to Form and to the Couplement,
 Substance can no longer be common to all three in the sense of being
 their genus: to their posteriors it will bear a still different
 relation, serving them as a common base by being bound up with all
 alike. Substance, thus, resembles life, dim here, clearer there, or
 portraits of which one is an outline, another more minutely 
 worked. By
 measuring Being by its dim manifestation and neglecting a fuller
 revelation elsewhere, we may come to regard this dim existence as a
 common ground.
 
 But this procedure is scarcely permissible. Every being is a
 distinct whole. The dim manifestation is in no sense a common
 ground, just as there is no common ground in the vegetal, the
 sensory and the intellectual forms of life.
 
 We conclude that the term "Being" must have different 
 connotations
 as applied to Matter, to Form and to both conjointly, in spite of
 the single source pouring into the different streams.
 
 Take a second derived from a first and a third from the 
 second: it
 is not merely that the one will rank higher and its successor be
 poorer and of lower worth; there is also the consideration that,
 even deriving from the same source, one thing, subjected in a
 certain degree to fire, will give us an earthen jar, while another,
 taking less of the heat, does not produce the jar.
 
 Perhaps we cannot even maintain that Matter and Form are derived
 from a single source; they are clearly in some sense different.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. The division into elements must, in short, be abandoned,
 especially in regard to Sensible Substance, known 
 necessarily by sense
 rather than by reason. We must no longer look for help in
 constituent parts, since such parts will not be substances, or at
 any rate not sensible substances.
 
 Our plan must be to apprehend what is constant in stone, earth,
 water and the entities which they compose- the vegetal and animal
 forms, considered purely as sensibles- and to confine this constant
 within a single genus. Neither Matter nor Form will thus be
 overlooked, for Sensible Substance comports them; fire and earth and
 the two intermediaries consist of Matter and Form, while composite
 things are actually many substances in one. They all, moreover, have
 that common property which distinguishes them from other things:
 serving as subjects to these others, they are never 
 themselves present
 in a subject nor predicated of any other thing. Similarly, all the
 characteristics which we have ascribed to Substance find a place in
 this classification.
 
 But Sensible Substance is never found apart from magnitude and
 quality: how then do we proceed to separate these accidents? If we
 subtract them- magnitude, figure, colour, dryness, moistness- what
 is there left to be regarded as Substance itself? All the substances
 under consideration are, of course, qualified.
 
 There is, however, something in relation to which whatever turns
 Substance into qualified Substance is accidental: thus, the whole of
 fire is not Substance, but only a part of it- if the term "part" be
 allowed.
 
 What then can this "part" be? Matter may be suggested. But are
 we actually to maintain that the particular sensible substance
 consists of a conglomeration of qualities and Matter, while Sensible
 Substance as a whole is merely the sum of these coagulations in the
 uniform Matter, each one separately forming a quale or a quantum or
 else a thing of many qualities? Is it true to say that everything
 whose absence leaves subsistence incomplete is a part of the
 particular substance, while all that is accidental to the substance
 already existent takes independent rank and is not submerged in the
 mixture which constitutes this so-called substance?
 
 I decline to allow that whatever combines in this way with
 anything else is Substance if it helps to produce a single 
 mass having
 quantity and quality, whereas taken by itself and divorced from this
 complementary function it is a quality: not everything which
 composes the amalgam is Substance, but only the amalgam as a whole.
 
 And let no one take exception on the ground that we produce
 Sensible Substance from non-substances. The whole amalgam itself is
 not True Substance; it is merely an imitation of that True Substance
 which has Being apart from its concomitants, these indeed being
 derived from it as the possessor of True Being. In the lower 
 realm the
 case is different: the underlying ground is sterile, and from its
 inability to produce fails to attain to the status of Being; it
 remains a shadow, and on this shadow is traced a sketch- the world
 of Appearance.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. So much for one of the genera- the "Substance," so called, of
 the Sensible realm.
 
 But what are we to posit as its species? how divide this genus?
 
 The genus as a whole must be identified with body. Bodies may be
 divided into the characteristically material and the organic: the
 material bodies comprise fire, earth, water, air; the organic the
 bodies of plants and animals, these in turn admitting of formal
 differentiation.
 
 The next step is to find the species of earth and of the other
 elements, and in the case of organic bodies to distinguish plants
 according to their forms, and the bodies of animals either by their
 habitations- on the earth, in the earth, and similarly for the other
 elements- or else as light, heavy and intermediate. Some bodies, we
 shall observe, stand in the middle of the universe, others
 circumscribe it from above, others occupy the middle sphere: in each
 case we shall find bodies different in shape, so that the bodies of
 the living beings of the heavens may be differentiated from those of
 the other elements.
 
 Once we have classified bodies into the four species, we 
 are ready
 to combine them on a different principle, at the same time
 intermingling their differences of place, form and constitution; the
 resultant combinations will be known as fiery or earthy on the basis
 of the excess or predominance of some one element.
 
 The distinction between First and Second Substances, between
 Fire and a given example of fire, entails a difference of a peculiar
 kind- the difference between universal and particular. This 
 however is
 not a difference characteristic of Substance; there is also 
 in Quality
 the distinction between whiteness and the white object, between
 grammar and some particular grammar.
 
 The question may here be asked: "What deficiency has grammar
 compared with a particular grammar, and science as a whole in
 comparison with a science?" Grammar is certainly not posterior to
 the particular grammar: on the contrary, the grammar as in 
 you depends
 upon the prior existence of grammar as such: the grammar as in you
 becomes a particular by the fact of being in you; it is otherwise
 identical with grammar the universal.
 
 Turn to the case of Socrates: it is not Socrates who bestows
 manhood upon what previously was not Man, but Man upon Socrates; the
 individual man exists by participation in the universal.
 
 Besides, Socrates is merely a particular instance of Man; this
 particularity can have no effect whatever in adding to his essential
 manhood.
 
 We may be told that Man [the universal] is Form alone, Socrates
 Form in Matter. But on this very ground Socrates will be less fully
 Man than the universal; for the Reason-Principle will be less
 effectual in Matter. If, on the contrary, Man is not determined by
 Form alone, but presupposes Matter, what deficiency has Man in
 comparison with the material manifestation of Man, or the
 Reason-Principle in isolation as compared with its embodiment in a
 unit of Matter?
 
 Besides, the more general is by nature prior; hence, the 
 Form-Idea
 is prior to the individual: but what is prior by nature is prior
 unconditionally. How then can the Form take a lower rank? The
 individual, it is true, is prior in the sense of being more readily
 accessible to our cognisance; this fact, however, entails no 
 objective
 difference.
 
 Moreover, such a difference, if established, would be 
 incompatible
 with a single Reason-Principle of Substance; First and Second
 Substance could not have the same Principle, nor be brought under a
 single genus.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. Another method of division is possible: substances may be
 classed as hot-dry, dry-cold, cold-moist, or however we 
 choose to make
 the coupling. We may then proceed to the combination and blending of
 these couples, either halting at that point and going no further
 than the compound, or else subdividing by habitation- on the 
 earth, in
 the earth- or by form and by the differences exhibited by living
 beings, not qua living, but in their bodies viewed as instruments of
 life.
 
 Differentiation by form or shape is no more out of place than a
 division based on qualities- heat, cold and the like. If it be
 objected that qualities go to make bodies what they are, then, we
 reply, so do blendings, colours, shapes. Since our discussion is
 concerned with Sensible Substance, it is not strange that it should
 turn upon distinctions related to sense-perception: this Substance
 is not Being pure and simple, but the Sensible Being which 
 we call the
 Universe.
 
 We have remarked that its apparent subsistence is in fact an
 assemblage of Sensibles, their existence guaranteed to us by
 sense-perception. But since their combination is unlimited, our
 division must be guided by the Form-Ideas of living beings, as for
 example the Form-Idea of Man implanted in Body; the particular Form
 acts as a qualification of Body, but there is nothing unreasonable
 in using qualities as a basis of division.
 
 We may be told that we have distinguished between simple and
 composite bodies, even ranking them as opposites. But our 
 distinction,
 we reply, was between material and organic bodies and raised no
 question of the composite. In fact, there exists no means of
 opposing the composite to the simple; it is necessary to 
 determine the
 simples in the first stage of division, and then, combining them on
 the basis of a distinct underlying principle, to differentiate the
 composites in virtue of their places and shapes, distinguishing for
 example the heavenly from the earthly.
 
 These observations will suffice for the Being [Substance], or
 rather the Becoming, which obtains in the Sensible realm.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. Passing to Quantity and the quantum, we have to consider the
 view which identifies them with number and magnitude on the ground
 that everything quantitative is numbered among Sensible things or
 rated by the extension of its substrate: we are here, of course,
 discussing not Quantity in isolation, but that which causes 
 a piece of
 wood to be three yards long and gives the five in "five horses,"
 
 Now we have often maintained that number and magnitude are to be
 regarded as the only true quantities, and that Space and Time have
 no right to be conceived as quantitative: Time as the measure of
 Motion should be assigned to Relation, while Space, being that which
 circumscribes Body, is also a relative and falls under the same
 category; though continuous, it is, like Motion, not included in
 Quantity.
 
 On the other hand, why do we not find in the category of
 Quantity "great" and "small"? It is some kind of Quantity which
 gives greatness to the great; greatness is not a relative, though
 greater and smaller are relatives, since these, like 
 doubleness, imply
 an external correlative.
 
 What is it, then, which makes a mountain small and a grain of
 millet large? Surely, in the first place, "small" is equivalent to
 "smaller." It is admitted that the term is applied only to things of
 the same kind, and from this admission we may infer that the
 mountain is "smaller" rather than "small," and that the grain of
 millet is not large in any absolute sense but large for a grain of
 millet. In other words, since the comparison is between things of
 the same kind, the natural predicate would be a comparative.
 
 Again, why is not beauty classed as a relative? Beauty, unlike
 greatness, we regard as absolute and as a quality; "more 
 beautiful" is
 the relative. Yet even the term "beautiful" may be attached to
 something which in a given relation may appear ugly: the beauty of
 man, for example, is ugliness when compared with that of the gods;
 "the most beautiful of monkeys," we may quote, "is ugly in
 comparison with any other type." Nonetheless, a thing is beautiful
 in itself; as related to something else it is either more or less
 beautiful.
 
 Similarly, an object is great in itself, and its 
 greatness is due,
 not to any external, but to its own participation in the Absolute
 Great.
 
 Are we actually to eliminate the beautiful on the pretext that
 there is a more beautiful? No more then must we eliminate the great
 because of the greater: the greater can obviously have no existence
 whatever apart from the great, just as the more beautiful can have
 no existence without the beautiful.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. It follows that we must allow contrariety to Quantity:
 whenever we speak of great and small, our notions acknowledge this
 contrariety by evolving opposite images, as also when we 
 refer to many
 and few; indeed, "few" and "many" call for similar treatment to
 "small" and "great."
 
 "Many," predicated of the inhabitants of a house, does duty for
 "more": "few" people are said to be in the theatre instead of "less."
 
 "Many," again, necessarily involves a large numerical plurality.
 This plurality can scarcely be a relative; it is simply an expansion
 of number, its contrary being a contraction.
 
 The same applies to the continuous [magnitude], the notion of
 which entails prolongation to a distant point.
 
 Quantity, then, appears whenever there is a progression from the
 unit or the point: if either progression comes to a rapid halt, we
 have respectively "few" and "small"; if it goes forward and does not
 quickly cease, "many" and "great."
 
 What, we may be asked, is the limit of this progression? What,
 we retort, is the limit of beauty, or of heat? Whatever limit you
 impose, there is always a "hotter"; yet "hotter" is accounted a
 relative, "hot" a pure quality.
 
 In sum, just as there is a Reason-Principle of Beauty, so there
 must be a Reason-Principle of greatness, participation in which
 makes a thing great, as the Principle of beauty makes it beautiful.
 
 To judge from these instances, there is contrariety in Quantity.
 Place we may neglect as not strictly coming under the category of
 Quantity; if it were admitted, "above" could only be a contrary if
 there were something in the universe which was "below": as referring
 to the partial, the terms "above" and "below" are used in a purely
 relative sense, and must go with "right" and "left" into the
 category of Relation.
 
 Syllable and discourse are only indirectly quantities or
 substrates of Quantity; it is voice that is quantitative: 
 but voice is
 a kind of Motion; it must accordingly in any case [quantity or no
 quantity] be referred to Motion, as must activity also.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. It has been remarked that the continuous is effectually
 distinguished from the discrete by their possessing the one a
 common, the other a separate, limit.
 
 The same principle gives rise to the numerical 
 distinction between
 odd and even; and it holds good that if there are differentiae
 found in both contraries, they are either to be abandoned to the
 objects numbered, or else to be considered as differentiae of the
 abstract numbers, and not of the numbers manifested in the sensible
 objects. If the numbers are logically separable from the 
 objects, that
 is no reason why we should not think of them as sharing the same
 differentiae.
 
 But how are we to differentiate the continuous, comprising as it
 does line, surface and solid? The line may be rated as of one
 dimension, the surface as of two dimensions, the solid as of 
 three, if
 we are only making a calculation and do not suppose that we are
 dividing the continuous into its species; for it is an 
 invariable rule
 that numbers, thus grouped as prior and posterior, cannot be brought
 into a common genus; there is no common basis in first, second and
 third dimensions. Yet there is a sense in which they would appear to
 be equal- namely, as pure measures of Quantity: of higher and lower
 dimensions, they are not however more or less quantitative.
 
 Numbers have similarly a common property in their being numbers
 all; and the truth may well be, not that One creates two, and two
 creates three, but that all have a common source.
 
 Suppose, however, that they are not derived from any source
 whatever, but merely exist; we at any rate conceive them as being
 derived, and so may be assumed to regard the smaller as taking
 priority over the greater: yet, even so, by the mere fact of their
 being numbers they are reducible to a single type.
 
 What applies to numbers is equally true of magnitudes; 
 though here
 we have to distinguish between line, surface and solid- the last
 also referred to as "body"- in the ground that, while all are
 magnitudes, they differ specifically.
 
 It remains to enquire whether these species are themselves to be
 divided: the line into straight, circular, spiral; the surface into
 rectilinear and circular figures; the solid into the various solid
 figures- sphere and polyhedra: whether these last should be
 subdivided, as by the geometers, into those contained by triangular
 and quadrilateral planes: and whether a further division of 
 the latter
 should be performed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. How are we to classify the straight line? Shall we deny that
 it is a magnitude?
 
 The suggestion may be made that it is a qualified magnitude. May
 we not, then, consider straightness as a differentia of "line"? We at
 any rate draw on Quality for differentiae of Substance.
 
 The straight line is, thus, a quantity plus a differentia; but it
 is not on that account a composite made up of straightness and line:
 if it be a composite, the composite possesses a differentiae of its
 own.
 
 But [if the line is a quantity] why is not the product of three
 lines included in Quantity? The answer is that a triangle 
 consists not
 merely of three lines but of three lines in a particular
 disposition, a quadrilateral of four lines in a particular
 disposition: even the straight line involves disposition as well as
 quantity.
 
 Holding that the straight line is not mere quantity, we should
 naturally proceed to assert that the line as limited is not mere
 quantity, but for the fact that the limit of a line is a point,
 which is in the same category, Quantity. Similarly, the limited
 surface will be a quantity, since lines, which have a far 
 better right
 than itself to this category, constitute its limits. With the
 introduction of the limited surface- rectangle, hexagon, 
 polygon- into
 the category of Quantity, this category will be brought to include
 every figure whatsoever.
 
 If however by classing the triangle and the rectangle as 
 qualia we
 propose to bring figures under Quality, we are not thereby precluded
 from assigning the same object to more categories than one: in so
 far as it is a magnitude- a magnitude of such and such a 
 size- it will
 belong to Quantity; in so far as it presents a particular shape, to
 Quality.
 
 It may be urged that the triangle is essentially a particular
 shape. Then what prevents our ranking the sphere also as a quality?
 
 To proceed on these lines would lead us to the conclusion that
 geometry is concerned not with magnitudes but with Quality. But this
 conclusion is untenable; geometry is the study of magnitudes. The
 differences of magnitudes do not eliminate the existence of 
 magnitudes
 as such, any more than the differences of substances annihilate the
 substances themselves.
 
 Moreover, every surface is limited; it is impossible for any
 surface to be infinite in extent.
 
 Again, when I find Quality bound up with Substance, I 
 regard it as
 substantial quality: I am not less, but far more, disposed to see in
 figures or shapes [qualitative] varieties of Quantity. Besides, if
 we are not to regard them as varieties of magnitude, to what 
 genus are
 we to assign them?
 
 Suppose, then, that we allow differences of magnitude; we commit
 ourselves to a specific classification of the magnitudes so
 differentiated.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. How far is it true that equality and inequality are
 characteristic of Quantity?
 
 Triangles, it is significant, are said to be similar rather than
 equal. But we also refer to magnitudes as similar, and the accepted
 connotation of similarity does not exclude similarity or 
 dissimilarity
 in Quantity. It may, of course, be the case that the term 
 "similarity"
 has a different sense here from that understood in reference to
 Quality.
 
 Furthermore, if we are told that equality and inequality are
 characteristic of Quantity, that is not to deny that similarity also
 may be predicated of certain quantities. If, on the contrary,
 similarity and dissimilarity are to be confined to Quality, the
 terms as applied to Quantity must, as we have said, bear a different
 meaning.
 
 But suppose similarity to be identical in both genera; Quantity
 and Quality must then be expected to reveal other properties held in
 common.
 
 May the truth be this: that similarity is predicable of Quantity
 only in so far as Quantity possesses [qualitative] 
 differences? But as
 a general rule differences are grouped with that of which they are
 differences, especially when the difference is a difference of that
 thing alone. If in one case the difference completes the 
 substance and
 not in another, we inevitably class it with that which it completes,
 and only consider it as independent when it is not 
 complementary: when
 we say "completes the substance," we refer not to Subtance as such
 but to the differentiated substance; the particular object is to be
 thought of as receiving an accession which is non-substantial.
 
 We must not however fad to observe that we predicate equality of
 triangles, rectangles, and figures generally, whether plane or
 solid: this may be given as a ground for regarding equality and
 inequality as characteristic of Quantity.
 
 It remains to enquire whether similarity and dissimilarity are
 characteristic of Quality.
 
 We have spoken of Quality as combining with other 
 entities, Matter
 and Quantity, to form the complete Sensible Substance; this 
 Substance,
 so called, may be supposed to constitute the manifold world of
 Sense, which is not so much an essence as a quale. Thus, for the
 essence of fire we must look to the Reason-Principle; what produces
 the visible aspect is, properly speaking, a quale.
 
 Man's essence will lie in his Reason-Principle; that which is
 perfected in the corporeal nature is a mere image of the
 Reason-Principle a quale rather than an essence.
 
 Consider: the visible Socrates is a man, yet we give the name of
 Socrates to that likeness of him in a portrait, which 
 consists of mere
 colours, mere pigments: similarly, it is a Reason-Principle which
 constitutes Socrates, but we apply the name Socrates to the Socrates
 we see: in truth, however, the colours and shapes which make up the
 visible Socrates are but reproductions of those in the
 Reason-Principle, while this Reason-Principle itself bears a
 corresponding relation to the truest Reason-Principle of Man. But we
 need not elaborate this point.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. When each of the entities bound up with the pseudo-substance
 is taken apart from the rest, the name of Quality is given 
 to that one
 among them, by which without pointing to essence or quantity 
 or motion
 we signify the distinctive mark, the type or aspect of a thing- for
 example, the beauty or ugliness of a body. This beauty- need we
 say?- is identical in name only with Intellectual Beauty: it follows
 that the term "Quality" as applied to the Sensible and the
 Intellectual is necessarily equivocal; even blackness and whiteness
 are different in the two spheres.
 
 But the beauty in the germ, in the particular 
 Reason-Principle- is
 this the same as the manifested beauty, or do they coincide only in
 name? Are we to assign this beauty- and the same question applies to
 deformity in the soul- to the Intellectual order, or to the
 Sensible? That beauty is different in the two spheres is by 
 now clear.
 If it be embraced in Sensible Quality, then virtue must also be
 classed among the qualities of the lower. But merely some 
 virtues will
 take rank as Sensible, others as Intellectual qualities.
 
 It may even be doubted whether the arts, as 
 Reason-Principles, can
 fairly be among Sensible qualities; Reason-Principles, it is 
 true, may
 reside in Matter, but "matter" for them means Soul. On the 
 other hand,
 their being found in company with Matter commits them in some degree
 to the lower sphere. Take the case of lyrical music: it is performed
 upon strings; melody, which may be termed a part of the art, is
 sensuous sound- though, perhaps, we should speak here not of 
 parts but
 of manifestations [Acts]: yet, called manifestations, they are
 nonetheless sensuous. The beauty inherent in body is similarly
 bodiless; but we have assigned it to the order of things 
 bound up with
 body and subordinate to it.
 
 Geometry and arithmetic are, we shall maintain, of a twofold
 character; in their earthly types they rank with Sensible 
 Quality, but
 in so far as they are functions of pure Soul, they necessarily
 belong to that other world in close proximity to the Intellectual.
 This, too, is in Plato's view the case with music and astronomy.
 
 The arts concerned with material objects and making use of
 perceptible instruments and sense-perception must be classed with
 Sensible Quality, even though they are dispositions of the Soul,
 attendant upon its apostasy.
 
 There is also every reason for consigning to this category the
 practical virtues whose function is directed to a social 
 end: these do
 not isolate Soul by inclining it towards the higher; their
 manifestation makes for beauty in this world, a beauty 
 regarded not as
 necessary but as desirable.
 
 On this principle, the beauty in the germ, and still more the
 blackness and whiteness in it, will be included among Sensible
 Qualities.
 
 Are we, then, to rank the individual soul, as containing these
 Reason-Principles, with Sensible Substance? But we do not even
 identify the Principles with body; we merely include them in
 Sensible Quality on the ground that they are connected with body and
 are activities of body. The constituents of Sensible Substance have
 already been specified; we have no intention whatever of adding to
 them Substance bodiless.
 
 As for Qualities, we hold that they are invariably 
 bodiless, being
 affections arising within Soul; but, like the 
 Reason-Principles of the
 individual soul, they are associated with Soul in its apostasy, and
 are accordingly counted among the things of the lower realm: such
 affections, torn between two worlds by their objects and their
 abode, we have assigned to Quality, which is indeed not bodily but
 manifested in body.
 
 But we refrain from assigning Soul to Sensible Substance, on the
 ground that we have already referred to Quality [which is Sensible]
 those affections of Soul which are related to body. On the contrary,
 Soul, conceived apart from affection and Reason-Principle, we have
 restored to its origin, leaving in the lower realm no substance
 which is in any sense Intellectual.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. This procedure, if approved, will entail a 
 distinction between
 psychic and bodily qualities, the latter belonging specifically to
 body.
 
 If we decide to refer all souls to the higher, we are still at
 liberty to perform for Sensible qualities a division founded upon
 the senses themselves- the eyes, the ears, touch, taste, 
 smell; and if
 we are to look for further differences, colours may be subdivided
 according to varieties of vision, sounds according to varieties of
 hearing, and so with the other senses: sounds may also be classified
 qualitatively as sweet, harsh, soft.
 
 Here a difficulty may be raised: we divide the varieties of
 Substance and their functions and activities, fair or foul or indeed
 of any kind whatsoever, on the basis of Quality, Quantity rarely, if
 ever, entering into the differences which produce species; Quantity,
 again, we divide in accordance with qualities of its own: 
 how then are
 we to divide Quality itself into species? what differences are we to
 employ, and from what genus shall we take them? To take them from
 Quality itself would be no less absurd than setting up substances as
 differences of substances.
 
 How, then, are we to distinguish black from white? how
 differentiate colours in general from tastes and tangible qualities?
 By the variety of sense-organs? Then there will be no difference in
 the objects themselves.
 
 But, waiving this objection, how deal with qualities perceived
 by the same sense-organ? We may be told that some colours integrate,
 others disintegrate the vision, that some tastes integrate, others
 disintegrate the tongue: we reply that, first, it is the actual
 experiences [of colour and taste, and not the sense-organs] that we
 are discussing and it is to these that the notions of integration
 and disintegration must be applied; secondly, a means of
 differentiating these experiences has not been offered.
 
 It may be suggested that we divide them by their powers, and
 this suggestion is so far reasonable that we may well agree to
 divide the non-sensuous qualities, the sciences for example, on this
 basis; but we see no reason for resorting to their effects for the
 division of qualities sensuous. Even if we divide the sciences by
 their powers, founding our division of their processes upon the
 faculties of the mind, we can only grasp their differences in a
 rational manner if we look not only to their subject-matter but also
 to their Reason-Principles.
 
 But, granted that we may divide the arts by their
 Reason-Principles and theorems, this method will hardly apply to
 embodied qualities. Even in the arts themselves an explanation would
 be required for the differences between the Reason-Principles
 themselves. Besides, we have no difficulty in seeing that white
 differs from black; to account for this difference is the purpose of
 our enquiry.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. These problems at any rate all serve to show that, while in
 general it is necessary to look for differences by which to separate
 things from each other, to hunt for differences of the differences
 themselves is both futile and irrational. We cannot have 
 substances of
 substances, quantities of quantities, qualities of qualities,
 differences of differences; differences must, where 
 possible, be found
 outside the genus, in creative powers and the like: but where no
 such criteria are present, as in distinguishing dark-green from
 pale-green, both being regarded as derived from white and black,
 what expedient may be suggested?
 
 Sense-perception and intelligence may be trusted to indicate
 diversity but not to explain it: explanation is outside the province
 of sense-perception, whose function is merely to produce a variety
 of information; while, as for intelligence, it works exclusively
 with intuitions and never resorts to explanations to justify them;
 there is in the movements of intelligence a diversity which
 separates one object from another, making further differentiation
 unnecessary.
 
 Do all qualities constitute differentiae, or not? Granted that
 whiteness and colours in general and the qualities dependent upon
 touch and taste can, even while they remain species [of Quality],
 become differentiae of other things, how can grammar and music
 serve as differentiae? Perhaps in the sense that minds may be
 distinguished as grammatical and musical, especially if the
 qualities are innate, in which case they do become specific
 differentiae.
 
 It remains to decide whether there can be any differentia derived
 from the genus to which the differentiated thing belongs, or whether
 it must of necessity belong to another genus? The former alternative
 would produce differentiae of things derived from the same genus as
 the differentiae themselves- for example, qualities of qualities.
 Virtue and vice are two states differing in quality: the states are
 qualities, and their differentiae qualities- unless indeed it be
 maintained that the state undifferentiated is not a quality, that
 the differentia creates the quality.
 
 But consider the sweet as beneficial, the bitter as injurious:
 then bitter and sweet are distinguished, not by Quality, but by
 Relation. We might also be disposed to identify the sweet with the
 thick, and the Pungent with the thin: "thick" however hardly reveals
 the essence but merely the cause of sweetness- an argument which
 applies equally to pungency.
 
 We must therefore reflect whether it may be taken as an 
 invariable
 rule that Quality is never a differentia of Quality, any more than
 Substance is a differentia of Substance, or Quantity of Quantity.
 
 Surely, it may be interposed, five differs from three by two.
 No: it exceeds it by two; we do not say that it differs: how could
 it differ by a "two" in the "three"? We may add that neither can
 Motion differ from Motion by Motion. There is, in short, no parallel
 in any of the other genera.
 
 In the case of virtue and vice, whole must be compared 
 with whole,
 and the differentiation conducted on this basis. As for the
 differentia being derived from the same genus as themselves,
 namely, Quality, and from no other genus, if we proceed on the
 principle that virtue is bound up with pleasure, vice with lust,
 virtue again with the acquisition of food, vice with idle
 extravagance, and accept these definitions as satisfactory, then
 clearly we have, here too, differentiae which are not qualities.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 19
 
 19. With Quality we have undertaken to group the 
 dependent qualia,
 in so far as Quality is bound up with them; we shall not however
 introduce into this category the qualified objects [qua 
 objects], that
 we may not be dealing with two categories at once; we shall pass
 over the objects to that which gives them their [specific] name.
 
 But how are we to classify such terms as "not white"? If "not
 white" signifies some other colour, it is a quality. But if it is
 merely a negation of an enumeration of things not white, it will be
 either a meaningless sound, or else a name or definition of
 something actual: if a sound, it is a kind of motion; if a name or
 definition, it is a relative, inasmuch as names and definitions are
 significant. But if not only the things enumerated are in some one
 genus, but also the propositions and terms in question must 
 be each of
 them significative of some genus, then we shall assert that negative
 propositions and terms posit certain things within a restricted
 field and deny others. Perhaps, however, it would be better, in view
 of their composite nature, not to include the negations in the same
 genus as the affirmations.
 
 What view, then, shall we take of privations? If they are
 privations of qualities, they will themselves be qualities:
 "toothless" and "blind," for example, are qualities. "Naked" and
 "dothed," on the other hand, are neither of them qualities 
 but states:
 they therefore comport a relation to something else.
 
 [With regard to passive qualities:]
 
 Passivity, while it lasts, is not a quality but a motion; when
 it is a past experience remaining in one's possession, it is a
 quality; if one ceases to possess the experience then regarded as a
 finished occurrence, one is considered to have been moved- in other
 words, to have been in Motion. But in none of these cases is it
 necessary to conceive of anything but Motion; the idea of time
 should be excluded; even present time has no right to be introduced.
 
 "Well" and similar adverbial expressions are to be 
 referred to the
 single generic notion [of Quality].
 
 It remains to consider whether blushing should be referred to
 Quality, even though the person blushing is not included in this
 category. The fact of becoming flushed is rightly not referred to
 Quality; for it involves passivity- in short, Motion. But if one has
 ceased to become flushed and is actually red, this is surely 
 a case of
 Quality, which is independent of time. How indeed are we to define
 Quality but by the aspect which a substance presents? By predicating
 of a man redness, we clearly ascribe to him a quality.
 
 We shall accordingly maintain that states alone, and not
 dispositions, constitute qualities: thus, "hot" is a quality but not
 "growing hot," "ill" but not "turning ill."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 20
 
 20. We have to ascertain whether there is not to every quality a
 contrary. In the case of virtue and vice, even the mean appears to
 be contrary to the extremes.
 
 But when we turn to colours, we do not find the intermediates so
 related. If we regard the intermediates as blendings of the
 extremes, we must not posit any contrariety other than that between
 black and white, but must show that all other colours are 
 combinations
 of these two. Contrariety however demands that there be some one
 distinct quality in the intermediates, though this quality 
 may be seen
 to arise from a combination.
 
 It may further be suggested that contraries not only differ from
 each other, but also entail the greatest possible 
 difference. But "the
 greatest possible difference" would seem to presuppose that
 intermediates have already been established: eliminate the 
 series, and
 how will you define "the greatest possible"? Sight, we may be told,
 will reveal to us that grey is nearer than black to white; and taste
 may be our judge when we have hot, cold and no intermediate.
 
 That we are accustomed to act upon these assumptions is obvious
 enough; but the following considerations may perhaps commend
 themselves:
 
 White and yellow are entirely different from each other- a
 statement which applies to any colour whatsoever as compared with
 any other; they are accordingly contrary qualities. Their
 contrariety is independent of the presence of intermediates: between
 health and disease no intermediate intrudes, and yet they are
 contraries.
 
 It may be urged that the products of a contrariety exhibit the
 greatest diversity. But "the greatest diversity" is clearly
 meaningless, unless we can point to lower degrees of diversity in
 the means. Thus, we cannot speak of "the greatest diversity" in
 reference to health and disease. This definition of contrariety is
 therefore inadmissible.
 
 Suppose that we say "great diversity" instead of "the greatest":
 if "great" is equivalent to greater and implies a less, immediate
 contraries will again escape us; if, on the other hand, we mean
 strictly "great" and assume that every quality shows a great
 divergence from every other, we must not suppose that the divergence
 can be measured by a comparative.
 
 Nonetheless, we must endeavour to find a meaning for the term
 "contrary." Can we accept the principle that when things have a
 certain similarity which is not generic nor in any sense due to
 admixture, but a similarity residing in their forms- if the term be
 permitted- they differ in degree but are not contraries; contraries
 being rather those things which have no specific identity? 
 It would be
 necessary to stipulate that they belong to the same genus, 
 Quality, in
 order to cover those immediate contraries which [apparently] have
 nothing conducing to similarity, inasmuch as there are no
 intermediates looking both ways, as it were, and having a mutual
 similarity to each other; some contraries are precluded by their
 isolation from similarity.
 
 If these observations be sound, colours which have a 
 common ground
 will not be contraries. But there will be nothing to prevent, not
 indeed every colour from being contrary to every other, but any one
 colour from being contrary to any other; and similarly with tastes.
 This will serve as a statement of the problem.
 
 As for Degree [subsisting in Quality], it was given as 
 our opinion
 that it exists in the objects participating in Quality, 
 though whether
 it enters into qualities as such- into health and justice- was left
 open to question. If indeed these qualities possess an 
 extension quite
 apart from their participants, we must actually ascribe to them
 degrees: but in truth they belong to a sphere where each 
 entity is the
 whole and does not admit of degree.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 21
 
 21. The claim of Motion to be established as a genus will depend
 upon three conditions: first, that it cannot rightly be referred to
 any other genus; second, that nothing higher than itself can be
 predicated of it in respect of its essence; third, that by assuming
 differences it will produce species. These conditions satisfied, we
 may consider the nature of the genus to which we shall refer it.
 
 Clearly it cannot be identified with either the Substance or the
 Quality of the things which possess it. It cannot, further, be
 consigned to Action, for Passivity also comprises a variety of
 motions; nor again to Passivity itself, because many motions are
 actions: on the contrary, actions and passions are to be referred to
 Motion.
 
 Furthermore, it cannot lay claim to the category of Relation on
 the mere ground that it has an attributive and not a self-centred
 existence: on this ground, Quality too would find itself in that
 same category; for Quality is an attribute and contained in an
 external: and the same is true of Quantity.
 
 If we are agreed that Quality and Quantity, though attributive,
 are real entities, and on the basis of this reality 
 distinguishable as
 Quality and Quantity respectively: then, on the same principle,
 since Motion, though an attribute has a reality prior to its
 attribution, it is incumbent upon us to discover the intrinsic
 nature of this reality. We must never be content to regard as a
 relative something which exists prior to its attribution, but only
 that which is engendered by Relation and has no existence apart from
 the relation to which it owes its name: the double, strictly so
 called, takes birth and actuality in juxtaposition with a yard's
 length, and by this very process of being juxtaposed with a
 correlative acquires the name and exhibits the fact of being double.
 
 What, then, is that entity, called Motion, which, though
 attributive, has an independent reality, which makes its attribution
 possible- the entity corresponding to Quality, Quantity and 
 Substance?
 
 But first, perhaps, we should make sure that there is nothing
 prior to Motion and predicated of it as its genus.
 
 Change may be suggested as a prior. But, in the first place,
 either it is identical with Motion, or else, if change be 
 claimed as a
 genus, it will stand distinct from the genera so far considered:
 secondly, Motion will evidently take rank as a species and have some
 other species opposed to it- becoming, say- which will be regarded
 as a change but not as a motion.
 
 What, then, is the ground for denying that becoming is a motion?
 The fact, perhaps, that what comes to be does not yet exist, whereas
 Motion has no dealings with the non-existent. But, on that ground,
 becoming will not be a change either. If however it be alleged that
 becoming is merely a type of alteration or growth since it 
 takes place
 when things alter and grow, the antecedents of becoming are being
 confused with becoming itself. Yet becoming, entailing as it does
 these antecedents, must necessarily be a distinct species; for the
 event and process of becoming cannot be identified with 
 merely passive
 alteration, like turning hot or white: it is possible for the
 antecedents to take place without becoming as such being 
 accomplished,
 except in so far as the actual alteration [implied in the 
 antecedents]
 has "come to be"; where, however, an animal or a vegetal life is
 concerned, becoming [or birth] takes place only upon its acquisition
 of a Form.
 
 The contrary might be maintained: that change is more plausibly
 ranked as a species than is Motion, because change signifies merely
 the substitution of one thing for another, whereas Motion involves
 also the removal of a thing from the place to which it belongs, as
 is shown by locomotion. Even rejecting this distinction, we must
 accept as types of Motion knowledge and musical performance- 
 in short,
 changes of condition: thus, alteration will come to be regarded as a
 species of Motion- namely, motion displacing.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 22
 
 22. But suppose that we identify alteration with Motion on the
 ground that Motion itself results in difference: how then do we
 proceed to define Motion?
 
 It may roughly be characterized as the passage from the
 potentiality to its realization. That is potential which can either
 pass into a Form- for example, the potential statue- or else 
 pass into
 actuality- such as the ability to walk: whenever progress is made
 towards the statue, this progress is Motion; and when the ability to
 walk is actualized in walking, this walking is itself Motion:
 dancing is, similarly, the motion produced by the potential dancer
 taking his steps.
 
 In the one type of Motion a new Form comes into existence
 created by the motion; the other constitutes, as it were, the pure
 Form of the potentiality, and leaves nothing behind it when once the
 motion has ceased. Accordingly, the view would not be unreasonable
 which, taking some Forms to be active, others inactive, regarded
 Motion as a dynamic Form in opposition to the other Forms which are
 static, and further as the cause of whatever new Form ensues upon
 it. To proceed to identify this bodily motion with life would
 however be unwarrantable; it must be considered as identical only in
 name with the motions of Intellect and Soul.
 
 That Motion is a genus we may be all the more confident in
 virtue of the difficulty- the impossibility even- of confining it
 within a definition.
 
 But how can it be a Form in cases where the motion leads to
 deterioration, or is purely passive? Motion, we may suggest, is like
 the heat of the sun causing some things to grow and withering
 others. In so far as Motion is a common property, it is identical in
 both conditions; its apparent difference is due to the objects moved.
 
 Is, then, becoming ill identical with becoming well? As motions
 they are identical. In what respect, then, do they differ? In their
 substrates? or is there some other criterion?
 
 This question may however be postponed until we come to consider
 alteration: at present we have to discover what is the constant
 element in every motion, for only on this basis can we establish the
 claim of Motion to be a genus.
 
 Perhaps the one term covers many meanings; its claim to generic
 status would then correspond to that of Being.
 
 As a solution of the problem we may suggest that motions 
 conducing
 to the natural state or functioning in natural conditions should
 perhaps, as we have already asserted, be regarded as being in a
 sense Forms, while those whose direction is contrary to 
 nature must be
 supposed to be assimilated to the results towards which they lead.
 
 But what is the constant element in alteration, in growth and
 birth and their opposites, in local change? What is that which makes
 them all motions? Surely it is the fact that in every case the
 object is never in the same state before and after the 
 motion, that it
 cannot remain still and in complete inactivity but, so long as the
 motion is present, is continually urged to take a new 
 condition, never
 acquiescing in Identity but always courting Difference; deprived of
 Difference, Motion perishes.
 
 Thus, Difference may be predicated of Motion, not merely in the
 sense that it arises and persists in a difference of conditions, but
 in the sense of being itself perpetual difference. It follows that
 Time, as being created by Motion, also entails perpetual difference:
 Time is the measure of unceasing Motion, accompanying its course
 and, as it were, carried along its stream.
 
 In short, the common basis of all Motion is the existence of a
 progression and an urge from potentiality and the potential to
 actuality and the actual: everything which has any kind of motion
 whatsoever derives this motion from a pre-existent 
 potentiality within
 itself of activity or passivity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 23
 
 23. The Motion which acts upon Sensible objects enters from
 without, and so shakes, drives, rouses and thrusts its participants
 that they may neither rest nor preserve their identity- and 
 all to the
 end that they may be caught into that restlessness, that flustering
 excitability which is but an image of Life.
 
 We must avoid identifying Motion with the objects moved: by
 walking we do not mean the feet but the activity springing from a
 potentiality in the feet. Since the potentiality is invisible, we
 see of necessity only the active feet- that is to say, not feet
 simply, as would be the case if they were at rest, but something
 besides feet, something invisible but indirectly seen as an
 accompaniment by the fact that we observe the feet to be in
 ever-changing positions and no longer at rest. We infer 
 alteration, on
 the other hand, from the qualitative change in the thing altered.
 
 Where, then, does Motion reside, when there is one thing that
 moves and another that passes from an inherent potentiality to
 actuality? In the mover? How then will the moved, the patient,
 participate in the motion? In the moved? Then why does not Motion
 remain in it, once having come? It would seem that Motion 
 must neither
 be separated from the active principle nor allowed to reside 
 in it; it
 must proceed from agent to patient without so inhering in the latter
 as to be severed from the former, passing from one to the 
 other like a
 breath of wind.
 
 Now, when the potentiality of Motion consists in an ability to
 walk, it may be imagined as thrusting a man forward and 
 causing him to
 be continually adopting a different position; when it lies in the
 capacity to heat, it heats; when the potentiality takes hold 
 of Matter
 and builds up the organism, we have growth; and when another
 potentiality demolishes the structure, the result is decay, 
 that which
 has the potentiality of demolition experiencing the decay. Where the
 birth-giving principle is active, we find birth; where it is
 impotent and the power to destroy prevails, destruction takes place-
 not the destruction of what already exists, but that which
 intervenes upon the road to existence.
 
 Health comes about in the same way- when the power which
 produces health is active and predominant; sickness is the result of
 the opposite power working in the opposite direction.
 
 Thus, Motion is conditioned, not only by the objects in which it
 occurs, but also by its origins and its course, and it is a
 distinctive mark of Motion to be always qualified and to take its
 quality from the moved.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 24
 
 24. With regard to locomotion: if ascending is to be 
 held contrary
 to descending, and circular motion different [in kind] from motion
 in a straight line, we may ask how this difference is to be defined-
 the difference, for example, between throwing over the head and
 under the feet.
 
 The driving power is one- though indeed it might be maintained
 that the upward drive is different from the downward, and 
 the downward
 passage of a different character from the upward, especially if it
 be a natural motion, in which case the up-motion constitutes
 lightness, the down-motion heaviness.
 
 But in all these motions alike there is the common tendency to
 seek an appointed place, and in this tendency we seem to have the
 differentia which separates locomotion from the other species.
 
 As for motion in a circle and motion in a straight line, if the
 former is in practice indistinguishable from the latter, how can we
 regard them as different? The only difference lies in the 
 shape of the
 course, unless the view be taken that circular motion is "impure,"
 as not being entirely a motion, not involving a complete surrender
 of identity.
 
 However, it appears in general that locomotion is a definite
 unity, taking its differences from externals.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 25
 
 25. The nature of integration and disintegrations calls for
 scrutiny. Are they different from the motions above mentioned, from
 coming-to-be and passing-away, from growth and decay, from change of
 place and from alteration? or must they be referred to these? or,
 again, must some of these be regarded as types of integration and
 disintegration?
 
 If integration implies that one element proceeds towards
 another, implies in short an approach, and disintegration, on the
 other hand, a retreat into the background, such motions may be
 termed local; we have clearly a case of two things moving in the
 direction of unity, or else making away from each other.
 
 If however the things achieve a sort of fusion, mixture, 
 blending,
 and if a unity comes into being, not when the process of combination
 is already complete, but in the very act of combining, to 
 which of our
 specified motions shall we refer this type? There will certainly be
 locomotion at first, but it will be succeeded by something
 different; just as in growth locomotion is found at the 
 outset, though
 later it is supplanted by quantitative motion. The present case is
 similar: locomotion leads the way, but integration or disintegration
 does not inevitably follow; integration takes place only when the
 impinging elements become intertwined, disintegration only when they
 are rent asunder by the contact.
 
 On the other hand, it often happens that locomotion follows
 disintegration, or else occurs simultaneously, though the experience
 of the disintegrated is not conceived in terms of locomotion: so too
 in integration a distinct experience, a distinct unification,
 accompanies the locomotion and remains separate from it.
 
 Are we then to posit a new species for these two motions, adding
 to them, perhaps, alteration? A thing is altered by becoming 
 dense- in
 other words, by integration; it is altered again by being rarefied-
 that is, by disintegration. When wine and water are mixed, something
 is produced different from either of the pre-existing elements:
 thus, integration takes place, resulting in alteration.
 
 But perhaps we should recall a previous distinction, and while
 holding that integrations and disintegrations precede alterations,
 should maintain that alterations are nonetheless distinct 
 from either;
 that, further, not every alteration is of this type [presupposing,
 that is to say, integration or disintegration], and, in particular,
 rarefication and condensation are not identical with disintegration
 and integration, nor in any sense derived from them: to suppose that
 they were would involve the admission of a vacuum.
 
 Again, can we use integration and disintegration to explain
 blackness and whiteness? But to doubt the independent existence of
 these qualities means that, beginning with colours, we may end by
 annihilating almost all qualities, or rather all without exception;
 for if we identify every alteration, or qualitative change, with
 integration and disintegration, we allow nothing whatever to 
 come into
 existence; the same elements persist, nearer or farther apart.
 
 Finally, how is it possible to class learning and being taught
 as integrations?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 26
 
 26. We may now take the various specific types of Motion, such
 as locomotion, and once again enquire for each one whether it is not
 to be divided on the basis of direction, up, down, straight, 
 circular-
 a question already raised; whether the organic motion should be
 distinguished from the inorganic- they are clearly not 
 alike; whether,
 again, organic motions should be subdivided into walking, 
 swimming and
 flight.
 
 Perhaps we should also distinguish, in each species, natural
 from unnatural motions: this distinction would however imply that
 motions have differences which are not external. It may indeed be
 the case that motions create these differences and cannot exist
 without them; but Nature may be supposed to be the ultimate source
 of motions and differences alike.
 
 Motions may also be classed as natural, artificial and
 purposive: "natural" embracing growth and decay; "artificial"
 architecture and shipbuilding; "purposive" enquiry, learning,
 government, and, in general, all speech and action.
 
 Again, with regard to growth, alteration and birth, the division
 may proceed from the natural and unnatural, or, speaking generally,
 from the characters of the moved objects.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 27
 
 27. What view are we to take of that which is opposed to Motion,
 whether it be Stability or Rest? Are we to consider it as a distinct
 genus, or to refer it to one of the genera already established? We
 should, no doubt, be well advised to assign Stability to the
 Intellectual, and to look in the lower sphere for Rest alone.
 
 First, then, we have to discover the precise nature of this
 Rest. If it presents itself as identical with Stability, we have no
 right to expect to find it in the sphere where nothing is stable and
 the apparently stable has merely a less strenuous motion.
 
 Suppose the contrary: we decide that Rest is different from
 Stability inasmuch as Stability belongs to the utterly immobile,
 Rest to the stationary which, though of a nature to move, does not
 move. Now, if Rest means coming to rest, it must be regarded as a
 motion which has not yet ceased but still continues; but if 
 we suppose
 it to be incompatible with Motion, we have first to ask whether
 there is in the Sensible world anything without motion.
 
 Yet nothing can experience every type of motion; certain motions
 must be ruled out in order that we may speak of the moving object as
 existing: may we not, then, say of that which has no 
 locomotion and is
 at rest as far as pertains to that specific type of motion, simply
 that it does not move?
 
 Rest, accordingly, is the negation of Motion: in other words, it
 has no generic status. It is in fact related only to one type of
 motion, namely, locomotion; it is therefore the negation of this
 motion that is meant.
 
 But, it may be asked, why not regard Motion as the negation of
 Stability? We reply that Motion does not appear alone; it is
 accompanied by a force which actualizes its object, forcing it on,
 as it were, giving it a thousand forms and destroying them all:
 Rest, on the contrary, comports nothing but the object itself, and
 signifies merely that the object has no motion.
 
 Why, then, did we not in discussing the Intellectual realm
 assert that Stability was the negation of Motion? Because it is not
 indeed possible to consider Stability as an annulling of Motion, for
 when Motion ceases Stability does not exist, but requires for its
 own existence the simultaneous existence of Motion; and what is of a
 nature to move is not stationary because Stability of that realm is
 motionless, but because Stability has taken hold of it; in so far as
 it has Motion, it will never cease to move: thus, it is stationary
 under the influence of Stability, and moves under the influence of
 Motion. In the lower realm, too, a thing moves in virtue of Motion,
 but its Rest is caused by a deficiency; it has been deprived of its
 due motion.
 
 What we have to observe is the essential character of this
 Sensible counterpart of Stability.
 
 Consider sickness and health. The convalescent moves in the
 sense that he passes from sickness to health. What species 
 of rest are
 we to oppose to this convalescence? If we oppose the condition from
 which he departs, that condition is sickness, not Stability; if that
 into which he passes, it is health, again not the same as Stability.
 
 It may be declared that health or sickness is indeed some form
 of Stability: we are to suppose, then, that Stability is the genus
 of which health and sickness are species; which is absurd.
 
 Stability may, again, be regarded as an attribute of health:
 according to this view, health will not be health before possessing
 Stability.
 
 These questions may however be left to the judgement of the
 individual.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 28
 
 28. We have already indicated that Activity and Passivity are to
 be regarded as motions, and that it is possible to distinguish
 absolute motions, actions, passions.
 
 As for the remaining so-called genera, we have shown 
 that they are
 reducible to those which we have posited.
 
 With regard to the relative, we have maintained that Relation
 belongs to one object as compared with another, that the two objects
 coexist simultaneously, and that Relation is found wherever a
 substance is in such a condition as to produce it; not that the
 substance is a relative, except in so far as it constitutes part of
 a whole- a hand, for example, or head or cause or principle or
 element.
 
 We may also adopt the ancient division of relatives into
 creative principles, measures, excesses and deficiencies, and those
 which in general separate objects on the basis of similarities and
 differences.
 
 Our investigation into the kinds of Being is now complete.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FOURTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON THE INTEGRAL OMNIPRESENCE OF THE
 
 AUTHENTIC EXISTENT (1).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. How are we to explain the omnipresence of the soul? Does it
 depend upon the definite magnitude of the material universe coupled
 with some native tendency in soul to distribute itself over material
 mass, or is it a characteristic of soul apart from body?
 
 In the latter case, soul will not appear just where body 
 may bring
 it; body will meet soul awaiting it everywhere; wheresoever 
 body finds
 place, there soul lay before ever body was; the entire material mass
 of the universe has been set into an existent soul.
 
 But if soul spread thus wide before material extension existed,
 then as covering all space it would seem to be of itself a thing of
 magnitude, and in what mode could it exist in the All before the All
 was in being, before there was any All? And who can accept a soul
 described as partless and massless and yet, for all that absence of
 extension, extending over a universe? We may perhaps be told that,
 though extended over the corporeal, it does not itself become so:
 but thus to give it magnitude as an accidental attribute leaves the
 problem still unsolved: precisely the same question must in 
 all reason
 arise: How can the soul take magnitude even in the move of accident?
 
 We cannot think of soul being diffused as a quality is, say
 sweetness or colour, for while these are actual states of the masses
 affected so that they show that quality at every point, none of them
 has an independent existence; they are attributes of body and known
 only as in body; such quality is necessarily of a definite
 extension. Further, the colour at any point is independent of that
 at any other; no doubt the Form, White, is the same all over, but
 there is not arithmetical identity; in soul there is; it is one soul
 in foot and in hand, as the facts of perception show. And yet in the
 case of qualities the one is observably distributed part for part;
 in the soul the identity is undistributed; what we sometimes call
 distribution is simply omnipresence.
 
 Obviously, we must take hold of the question from the very
 beginning in the hope of finding some clear and convincing theory as
 to how soul, immaterial and without magnitude, can be thus
 broad-spread, whether before material masses exist or as enveloping
 them. Of course, should it appear that this omnipresence may occur
 apart from material things, there is no difficulty in accepting its
 occurrence within the material.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Side by side exist the Authentic All and its counterpart, the
 visible universe. The Authentic is contained in nothing, 
 since nothing
 existed before it; of necessity anything coming after it must, as a
 first condition of existence, be contained by this All, especially
 since it depends upon the Authentic and without that could have
 neither stability nor movement.
 
 We may be reminded that the universe cannot be contained in the
 Authentic as in a place, where place would mean the 
 boundaries of some
 surrounding extension considered as an envelope, or some space
 formerly a part of the Void and still remaining unoccupied even
 after the emergence of the universe, that it can only support
 itself, as it were, upon the Authentic and rest in the embrace of
 its omnipresence; but this objection is merely verbal and will
 disappear if our meaning is grasped; we mention it for another
 purpose; it goes to enforce our real assertion that the 
 Authentic All,
 at once primal and veritable, needs no place and is in no way
 contained. The All, as being an integral, cannot fall short 
 of itself;
 it must ever have fulfilled its own totality, ever reached to its
 own equivalence; as far as the sum of entities extends, 
 there this is;
 for this is the All.
 
 Inevitably, also, anything other than this All that may be
 stationed therein must have part in the All, merge into it, and hold
 by its strength; it is not that the thing detaches a portion of the
 All but that within itself it finds the All which has entered into
 it while still unbrokenly self-abiding, since Being cannot lodge in
 non-Being, but, if anything, non-Being within Being.
 
 Being, then, is present to all Being; an identity cannot tear
 itself asunder; the omnipresence asserted of it must be presence
 within the realm of Being; that is, it must be a 
 self-presence. And it
 is in no way strange that the omnipresence should be at once
 self-abiding and universal; this is merely saying omnipresence
 within a unity.
 
 It is our way to limit Being to the sense-known and therefore to
 think of omnipresence in terms of the concrete; in our 
 overestimate of
 the sensible, we question how that other Nature can reach over such
 vastness; but our great is small, and this, small to us, is great;
 it reaches integrally to every point of our universe- or, better,
 our universe, moving from every side and in all its members towards
 this, meets it everywhere as the omnipresent All ever stretching
 beyond.
 
 The universe in all its reach can attain nothing further- that
 would mean overpassing the total of Being- and therefore is 
 content to
 circle about it; not able to encompass or even to fill the All, it
 is content to accept place and subordination, for thus it preserves
 itself in neighbouring the higher present to it- present and yet
 absent; self-holding, whatever may seek its presence.
 
 Wherever the body of the universe may touch, there it finds this
 All; it strives for no further advance, willing to revolve 
 in that one
 circle, since to it that is the All and in that movement its every
 part embraces the All.
 
 If that higher were itself in place there would be the need of
 seeking that precise place by a certain right path; part of seeker
 must touch part of sought, and there would be far and near. But
 since there is no far and near there must be, if presence at all,
 presence entire. And presence there indubitably is; this highest is
 present to every being of those that, free of far and near, are of
 power to receive.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. But are we to think of this Authentic Being as, itself,
 present, or does it remain detached, omnipresent in the sense only
 that powers from it enter everywhere?
 
 Under the theory of presence by powers, souls are described as
 rays; the source remains self-locked and these are flung forth to
 impinge upon particular living things.
 
 Now, in beings whose unity does not reproduce the entire 
 nature of
 that principle, any presence is presence of an emanant power: even
 this, however, does not mean that the principle is less than
 integrally present; it is not sundered from the power which it has
 uttered; all is offered, but the recipient is able to take only so
 much. But in Beings in which the plenitude of these powers is
 manifested, there clearly the Authentic itself is present, though
 still as remaining distinct; it is distinct in that, becoming the
 informing principle of some definite thing, it would 
 abdicate from its
 standing as the total and from its uttermost self-abiding and would
 belong, in some mode of accident, to another thing as well. Still it
 is not the property of what may seek to join with it; it 
 chooses where
 it will and enters as the participant's power may allow, but it does
 not become a chattel; it remains the quested and so in another sense
 never passes over. There is nothing disquieting in omnipresence
 after this mode where there is no appropriation: in the same
 accidental way, we may reasonably put it, soul concurs with body,
 but it is soul self-holding, not inbound with Matter, free 
 even of the
 body which it has illuminated through and through.
 
 Nor does the placelessness of Being make it surprising that it
 be present universally to things of place; on the contrary, 
 the wonder
 would be- the more than wonder, the impossibility- if from a place
 of its own it were present to other things in their place, or if
 having place it were present at all- and, especially present, as we
 assert, integrally.
 
 But set it outside of place, and reason tells us that it will be
 present entire where it is present at all and that, present to the
 total, it must be present in the same completeness to every several
 unity; otherwise something of it is here and something there, and at
 once it is fragmentary, it is body.
 
 How can we so dispart Being? We cannot break Life into parts; if
 the total was Life, the fragment is not. But we do not thus sunder
 Intelligence, one intelligence in this man, another in that? No;
 such a fragment would not be Intelligence. But the Being of the
 individual? Once more, if the total thing is Being, then a fragment
 could not be. Are we told that in a body, a total of parts, every
 member is also a body? But here we are dividing not body but a
 particular quantity of body, each of those divisions being described
 as body in virtue of possessing the Form or Idea that constitutes
 body; and this Idea has no magnitude, is incapable of magnitude.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. But how explain beings by the side of Being, and the 
 variety of
 intelligences and of souls, when Being has the unity of omnipresent
 identity and not merely that of a species, and when 
 intellect and soul
 are likewise numerically one? We certainly distinguish between the
 soul of the All and the particular souls.
 
 This seems to conflict with our view which, moreover, for all
 its logical necessity, scarcely carries conviction against our
 mental reluctance to the notion of unity identically omnipresent. It
 would appear more plausible to suppose a partition of the All-the
 original remaining undiminished- or, in a more legitimate phrase, an
 engendering from the All.
 
 Thus the Authentic would be left self-gathered, while what we
 think of as the parts- the separate souls- would come into being to
 produce the multiple total of the universe.
 
 But if the Authentic Being is to be kept unattached in order to
 remove the difficulty of integral omnipresence, the same
 considerations must apply equally to the souls; we would 
 have to admit
 that they cannot be integrally omnipresent in the bodies they are
 described as occupying; either, soul must be distributed, part to
 body's part, or it is lodged entire at some one point in the body
 giving forth some of its powers to the other points; and these very
 powers, again, present the same difficulty.
 
 A further objection is that some one spot in the body will hold
 the soul, the others no more than a power from it.
 
 Still, how account for the many souls, many intelligences, the
 beings by the side of the Being?
 
 No doubt the beings proceed from the Priors in the mode only of
 numerical distinction and not as concrete masses, but the difficulty
 remains as to how they come to constitute the plenitude of the
 material universe.
 
 This explanation by progression does not clear the problem.
 
 We are agreed that diversity within the Authentic 
 depends not upon
 spatial separation but sheerly upon differentiation; all Being,
 despite this plurality, is a unity still; "Being neighbours Being";
 all holds together; and thus the Intellectual-Principle [which is
 Being and the Beings] remains an integral, multiple by
 differentiation, not by spatial distinction.
 
 Soul too? Souls too. That principle distributed over material
 masses we hold to be in its own nature incapable of distribution;
 the magnitude belongs to the masses; when this soul-principle enters
 into them- or rather they into it- it is thought of as distributable
 only because, within the discrimination of the corporeal, the
 animating force is to be recognised at any and every point. For soul
 is not articulated, section of soul to section of body; there is
 integral omnipresence manifesting the unity of that principle, its
 veritable partlessness.
 
 Now as in soul unity does not debar variety, so with 
 Being and the
 Beings; in that order multiplicity does not conflict with unity.
 Multiplicity. This is not due to the need of flooding the universe
 with life; nor is the extension of the corporeal the cause of the
 multiplicity of souls; before body existed, soul was one and 
 many; the
 many souls fore-existed in the All not potentially but each
 effectively; that one collective soul is no bar to the variety; the
 variety does not abrogate the unity; the souls are apart without
 partition, present each to all as never having been set in 
 opposition;
 they are no more hedged off by boundaries than are the multiple
 items of knowledge in one mind; the one soul so exists as to include
 all souls; the nature of such a principle must be utterly free of
 boundary.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. Herein lies its greatness, not in mass; mass is 
 limited and may
 be whittled down to nothingness; in that order no such paring off is
 possible- nor, if it were, could there be any falling short. Where
 limitation is unthinkable, what fear can there be of absence at any
 point? Nowhere can that principle fail which is the unfailing, the
 everlasting, the undwindling; suppose it in flux and it must at some
 time flow to its end; since it is not in flux- and, besides [as the
 All], it has nowhere to flow to- it lies spread over the universe; in
 fact it is the universe, too great to be held by body, giving,
 therefore, to the material universe but little of itself, the little
 which that participant can take.
 
 We may not make this principle the lesser, or if in the sense of
 mass we do, we must not begin to mistrust the power of that less to
 stretch to the greater. Of course, we have in fact no right to
 affirm it less or to measure the thing of magnitude against 
 that which
 has none; as well talk of a doctor's skill being smaller than his
 body. This greatness is not to be thought of in terms of 
 quantity; the
 greater and less of body have nothing to do with soul.
 
 The nature of the greatness of soul is indicated by the fact
 that as the body grows, the larger mass is held by the same soul
 that sufficed to the smaller; it would be in many ways absurd to
 suppose a corresponding enlargement in the soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. But why does not one same soul enter more than one body?
 
 Because any second body must approach, if it might; but the
 first has approached and received and keeps.
 
 Are we to think that this second body, in keeping its soul with
 a like care, is keeping the same soul as the first?
 
 Why not: what difference is there? Merely some additions 
 [from the
 experiences of life, none in the soul itself].
 
 We ask further why one soul in foot and hand and not one soul in
 the distinct members of the universe.
 
 Sensations no doubt differ from soul to soul but only as do the
 conditions and experiences; this is difference not in the judging
 principle but in the matters coming to judgement; the judge 
 is one and
 the same soul pronouncing upon various events, and these not its own
 but belonging to a particular body; it is only as a man pronounces
 simultaneously upon a pleasant sensation in his finger and a pain in
 his head.
 
 But why is not the soul in one man aware, then, of the judgement
 passed by another?
 
 Because it is a judgement made, not a state set up; besides, the
 soul that has passed the judgement does not pronounce but simply
 judges: similarly a man's sight does not report to his 
 hearing, though
 both have passed judgement; it is the reason above both that
 reports, and this is a principle distinct from either. Often, as it
 happens, reason does become aware of a verdict formed in another
 reason and takes to itself an alien experience: but this has been
 dealt with elsewhere.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Let us consider once more how it is possible for an 
 identity to
 extend over a universe. This comes to the question how each
 variously placed entity in the multiplicity of the sense order can
 have its share in one identical Principle.
 
 The solution is in the reasons given for refusing to distribute
 that principle; we are not to parcel it out among the entities of
 the multiple; on the contrary, we bring the distributed multiples to
 the unity. The unity has not gone forth to them: from their 
 dispersion
 we are led to think of it as broken up to meet them, but this is to
 distribute the controller and container equally over the material
 handled.
 
 A hand may very well control an entire mass, a long plank, or
 anything of that sort; the control is effective throughout and yet
 is not distributed, unit for unit, over the object of control: the
 power is felt to reach over the whole area, though the hand is only
 hand-long, not taking the extension of the mass it wields; lengthen
 the object and, provided that the total is within the strength, the
 power handles the new load with no need of distributing itself over
 the increased area. Now let us eliminate the corporeal mass of the
 hand, retaining the power it exerted: is not that power, the
 impartible, present integrally over the entire area of control?
 
 Or imagine a small luminous mass serving as centre to a
 transparent sphere, so that the light from within shows upon the
 entire outer surface, otherwise unlit: we surely agree that the
 inner core of light, intact and immobile, reaches over the entire
 outer extension; the single light of that small centre 
 illuminates the
 whole field. The diffused light is not due to any bodily magnitude
 of that central point which illuminates not as body but as body lit,
 that is by another kind of power than corporeal quality: let us then
 abstract the corporeal mass, retaining the light as power: we can no
 longer speak of the light in any particular spot; it is equally
 diffused within and throughout the entire sphere. We can no longer
 even name the spot it occupied so as to say whence it came or how it
 is present; we can but seek and wonder as the search shows us the
 light simultaneously present at each and every point in the 
 sphere. So
 with the sunlight: looking to the corporeal mass you are able to
 name the source of the light shining through all the air, 
 but what you
 see is one identical light in integral omnipresence. Consider too
 the refraction of light by which it is thrown away from the line of
 incidence; yet, direct or refracted, it is one and the same 
 light. And
 supposing, as before, that the sun were simply an unembodied
 illuminant, the light would no longer be fixed to any one definite
 spot: having no starting point, no centre of origin, it would be an
 integral unity omnipresent.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. The light of our world can be allocated because it 
 springs from
 a corporeal mass of known position, but conceive an 
 immaterial entity,
 independent of body as being of earlier nature than all 
 body, a nature
 firmly self-based or, better, without need of base: such a
 principle, incorporeal, autonomous, having no source for its rising,
 coming from no place, attached to no material mass, this cannot be
 allotted part here and part there: that would be to give it both a
 previous position and a present attachment. Finally, anything
 participating in such a principle can participate only as entirety
 with entirety; there can be no allotment and no partition.
 
 A principle attached to body might be exposed, at least by way
 of accident, to such partition and so be definable as passive and
 partible in view of its close relationship with the body of which it
 is so to speak a state or a Form; but that which is not inbound with
 body, which on the contrary body must seek, will of necessity go
 utterly free of every bodily modification and especially of the very
 possibility of partition which is entirely a phenomenon of body,
 belonging to its very essence. As partibility goes with body, so
 impartibility with the bodiless: what partition is possible where
 there is no magnitude? If a thing of magnitude participates to any
 degree in what has no magnitude, it must be by a 
 participation without
 division; divisibility implies magnitude.
 
 When we affirm unity in multiplicity, we do not mean that the
 unity has become the multiples; we link the variety in the multiples
 with the unity which we discern, undivided, in them; and the unity
 must be understood as for ever distinct from them, from separate
 item and from total; that unity remains true to itself, remains
 itself, and so long as it remains itself cannot fail within its own
 scope [and therefore does reach over the multiple], yet it is not to
 be thought of as coextensive with the material universe or with any
 member of the All; utterly outside of the quantitative, it cannot be
 coextensive with anything.
 
 Extension is of body; what is not of body, but of the opposed
 order, must be kept free of extension; but where there is no 
 extension
 there is no spatial distinction, nothing of the here and there which
 would end its freedom of presence. Since, then, partition goes with
 place- each part occupying a place of its own- how can the placeless
 be parted? The unity must remain self-concentrated, immune from
 part, however much the multiple aspire or attain to contact with it.
 This means that any movement towards it is movement towards its
 entirety, and any participation attained is participation in its
 entirety. Its participants, then, link with it as with something
 unparticipated, something never appropriated: thus only can it
 remain intact within itself and within the multiples in which it is
 manifested. And if it did not remain thus intact, it would 
 cease to be
 itself; any participation, then, would not be in the object of quest
 but in something never quested.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. If in such a partition of the unity, that which entered into
 each participant were an entire- always identical with the first-
 then, in the progressive severance, the firsts would become
 numerous, each particular becoming a first: and then what prevents
 these many firsts from reconstituting the collective unity?
 Certainly not the bodies they have entered, for those firsts 
 cannot be
 present in the material masses as their Forms if they are to remain
 identical with the First from which they come. On the other hand,
 taking the part conceived as present in the multiple to be simply a
 power [emanating from the First], at once such a part ceases 
 to be the
 unity; we have then to ask how these powers come to be cut off, to
 have abandoned their origin; they certainly have not moved away with
 no purpose in their movement.
 
 Again, are those powers, entering the universe of sense, still
 within the First or not?
 
 If they are not, we have the absurdity that the First has been
 lessened, disempowered, stripped of power originally possessed.
 Besides, how could powers thus cut off subsist apart from the
 foundations of their being? Suppose these powers to be at once
 within the First and elsewhere; then the universe of sense contains
 either the entire powers or parts of them; if parts of powers, the
 other parts are There; if entires, then either the powers There are
 present here also undivided- and this brings us back to an identity
 omnipresent in integral identity- or they are each an entire 
 which has
 taken division into a multiplicity of similars so that attached to
 every essence there is one power only- that particularly
 appropriated to it- the other powers remaining powers unattached:
 yet power apart from Being is as impossible as Being apart 
 from power;
 for There power is Being or something greater than Being.
 
 Or, again, suppose the powers coming Thence are other than their
 source- lesser, fainter, as a bright light dwindles to a 
 dim- but each
 attached to its essence as a power must always be: such secondary
 powers would be perfectly uniform and at once we are forced to admit
 the omnipresence of the one same power or at the least the presence-
 as in one and the same body- of some undivided identity integral at
 every point.
 
 And if this is the case with a particular body, why not with the
 entire universe?
 
 If we think of the single power as being endlessly divided, it
 is no longer a power entire; partition means lessening of power;
 and, with part of power for part of body, the conditions of
 consciousness cease.
 
 Further, a vestigial cut off from its source disappears- for
 example, a reflected light- and in general an emanant loses its
 quality once it is severed from the original which it 
 reproduces: just
 so the powers derived from that source must vanish if they do not
 remain attached to it.
 
 This being so, where these powers appear, their source must be
 present with them; thus, once more, that source must itself be
 omnipresent as an undivided whole.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. We may be told that an image need not be thus 
 closely attached
 to its archetype, that we know images holding in the absence of
 their archetype and that a warmed object may retain its heat when
 the fire is withdrawn.
 
 To begin with the image and archetype: If we are reminded of an
 artist's picture we observe that here the image was produced by the
 artist, not by his subject; even in the case of a self-portrait, the
 picture is no "image of archetype," since it is not produced by the
 painter's body, the original represented: the reproduction is due to
 the effective laying on of the colours.
 
 Nor is there strictly any such making of image as we see in
 water or in mirrors or in a shadow; in these cases the 
 original is the
 cause of the image which, at once, springs from it and cannot exist
 apart from it. Now, it is in this sense that we are to understand
 the weaker powers to be images of the Priors. As for the
 illustration from the fire and the warmed object, the warmth 
 cannot be
 called an image of the fire unless we think of warmth as containing
 fire so that the two are separate things. Besides, the fire removed,
 the warmth does sooner or later disappear, leaving the object cold.
 
 If we are told that these powers fade out similarly, we are left
 with only one imperishable: the souls, the Intellectual-Principle,
 become perishable; then since Being [identical with the
 Intellectual-Principle] becomes transitory, so also must the Beings,
 its productions. Yet the sun, so long as it holds its station in the
 universe, will pour the same light upon the same places; to think
 its light may be lessened is to hold its mass perishable. But it has
 been abundantly stated that the emanants of the First are not
 perishable, that the souls, and the Intellectual-Principle with all
 its content, cannot perish.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. Still, this integral omnipresence admitted, why do not all
 things participate in the Intellectual Order in its entirety? Why
 has it a first participant, a second, and so on?
 
 We can but see that presence is determined by the fitness of the
 participant so that, while Being is omnipresent to the realm 
 of Being,
 never falling short of itself, yet only the competent possess
 themselves of that presence which depends not upon situation but
 upon adequacy; the transparent object and the opaque answer very
 differently to the light. These firsts, seconds, thirds, of
 participance are determined by rank, by power, not by place but by
 differentiation; and difference is no bar to coexistence, 
 witness soul
 and Intellectual-Principle: similarly our own knowledge, the trivial
 next the gravest; one and the same object yields colour to our
 sight, fragrance to smell, to every sense a particular 
 experience, all
 presented simultaneously.
 
 But would not this indicate that the Authentic is diverse,
 multiple?
 
 That diversity is simplex still; that multiple is one; 
 for it is a
 Reason-Principle, which is to say a unity in variety: all Being is
 one; the differing being is still included in Being; the
 differentiation is within Being, obviously not within 
 non-Being. Being
 is bound up with the unity which is never apart from it; wheresoever
 Being appears, there appears its unity; and the unity of Being is
 self-standing, for presence in the sensible does not abrogate
 independence: things of sense are present to the Intellectual- where
 this occurs- otherwise than as the Intellectual is present within
 itself; so, too, body's presence to soul differs from that of
 knowledge to soul; one item of knowledge is present in a 
 different way
 than another; a body's presence to body is, again, another form of
 relation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. Think of a sound passing through the air and carrying a
 word; an ear within range catches and comprehends; and the sound and
 word will strike upon any other ear you may imagine within the
 intervening void, upon any that attends; from a great distance many
 eyes look to the one object and all take it fully; all this, because
 eye and ear exist. In the same way, what is apt for soul will
 possess itself of soul, while from the one identical presence
 another will derive something else.
 
 Now the sound was diffused throughout the air not in sections
 but as one sound, entire at every point of that space. So with
 sight: if the air carries a shape impressed upon it this is one
 undivided whole; for, wherever there be an eye, there the shape will
 be grasped; even to such as reject this particular theory of sight,
 the facts of vision still stand as an example of participation
 determined by an identical unity.
 
 The sound is the clearer illustration: the form conveyed is an
 entirety over all the air space, for unless the spoken word were
 entire at every point, for every ear to catch the whole alike, the
 same effect could not be made upon every listener; the sound,
 evidently, is not strung along the air, section to section. 
 Why, then,
 need we hesitate to think of soul as a thing not extended in broken
 contact, part for part, but omnipresent within the range of its
 presence, indwelling in totality at every point throughout the All?
 
 Entered into such bodies as are apt to it, the soul is like the
 spoken sound present in the air, before that entry, like the speaker
 about to speak- though even embodied it remains at once the speaker
 and the silent.
 
 No doubt these illustrations are imperfect, but they carry a
 serviceable similitude: the soul belongs to that other Kind, and we
 must not conceive a part of it embodied and a part intact; it is at
 once a self-enclosed unity and a principle manifested in diversity.
 
 Further, any newcoming entity achieving soul receives 
 mysteriously
 that same principle which was equally in the previously ensouled;
 for it is not in the dispensation that a given part of soul 
 situate at
 some given point should enter here and there; what is thought of as
 entering was always a self-enclosed entire and, for all the seeming
 entry, so remains; no real entry is conceivable. If, then, the soul
 never entered and yet is now seen to be present- present without
 waiting upon the participant- clearly it is present, here 
 too, without
 breach of its self-inclusion. This can mean only that the
 participant came to soul; it lay outside the veritable reality but
 advanced towards it and so established itself in the kosmos of life.
 But this kosmos of life is a self-gathered entire, not divisible
 into constituent masses but prior to mass; in other words, the
 participation is of entire in entire. Any newcomer into that 
 kosmos of
 life will participate in it entire. Admitting, then, that this
 kosmos of life is present entire in the universe, it must be 
 similarly
 entire in each several entity; an identity numerically one, 
 it must be
 an undivided entire, omnipresent.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. But how account, at this, for its extension over all the
 heavens and all living beings?
 
 There is no such extension. Sense-perception, by insistence upon
 which we doubt, tells of Here and There; but reason 
 certifies that the
 Here and There do not attach to that principle; the extended has
 participated in that kosmos of life which itself has no extension.
 
 Clearly no participant can participate in itself;
 self-participation would be merely identity. Body, then, as
 participant does not participate in body; body it has; its
 participation must be in what is not body. So too magnitude does not
 participate in magnitude; it has it: not even in addition of
 quantity does the initial magnitude participate in magnitude: the
 two cubits do not themselves become three cubits; what occurs is
 that an object totalling to a certain quantity now totals to
 another: for magnitude to participate in magnitude the actual two
 cubits must themselves become the new three [which cannot occur].
 
 If, then, the divided and quantitatively extended is to
 participate in another Kind, is to have any sort of participation,
 it can participate only in something undivided, unextended, wholly
 outside of quantity. Therefore, that which is to be introduced by
 the participation must enter as itself an omnipresent indivisible.
 
 This indivisibility must, of course, not be taken in any sense
 of littleness: littleness would be still divisible, could not cover
 the extension of the participant and could not maintain integral
 presence against that expansion. Nor is it the indivisibility of a
 geometric point: the participant mass is no single point but
 includes an infinity of points; so that on the theory this principle
 must be an infinity of points, not a simultaneous entire, and so,
 again, will fail to cover the participant.
 
 If, then, the participant mass in its entirety is to contain
 that principle entire, the universe must hold that one soul 
 present at
 its every point.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. But, admitting this one soul at every point, how is there a
 particular soul of the individual and how the good soul and the bad?
 
 The one soul reaches to the individual but nonetheless contains
 all souls and all intelligences; this, because it is at once a unity
 and an infinity; it holds all its content as one yet with each item
 distinct, though not to the point of separation. Except by thus
 holding all its content as one-life entire, soul entire, all
 intelligence- it could not be infinite; since the individualities
 are not fenced off from each other, it remains still one 
 thing. It was
 to hold life not single but infinite and yet one life, one in the
 sense not of an aggregate built up but of the retention of the unity
 in which all rose. Strictly, of course, it is a matter not of the
 rising of the individuals but of their being eternally what they
 are; in that order, as there is no beginning, so there is no
 apportioning except as an interpretation by the recipient. What is
 of that realm is the ancient and primal; the relation to it of the
 thing of process must be that of approach and apparent merging with
 always dependence.
 
 But we ourselves, what are We?
 
 Are we that higher or the participant newcomer, the thing of
 beginnings in time?
 
 Before we had our becoming Here we existed There, men other than
 now, some of us gods: we were pure souls, Intelligence inbound with
 the entire of reality, members of the Intellectual, not fenced off,
 not cut away, integral to that All. Even now, it is true, we are not
 put apart; but upon that primal Man there has intruded another, a
 man seeking to come into being and finding us there, for we were not
 outside of the universe. This other has wound himself about us,
 foisting himself upon the Man that each of us was at first. Then it
 was as if one voice sounded, one word was uttered, and from 
 every side
 an ear attended and received and there was an effective hearing,
 possessed through and through of what was present and active upon
 it: now we have lost that first simplicity; we are become the dual
 thing, sometimes indeed no more than that later foisting, with the
 primal nature dormant and in a sense no longer present.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. But how did this intruder find entrance?
 
 It had a certain aptitude and it grasped at that to which it was
 apt. In its nature it was capable of soul: but what is unfitted to
 receive soul entire- present entire but not for it- takes what share
 it may; such are the members of the animal and vegetal order.
 Similarly, of a significant sound, some forms of being take sound
 and significance together, others only the sound, the blank impact.
 
 A living thing comes into existence containing soul, 
 present to it
 from the Authentic, and by soul is inbound with Reality entire; it
 possesses also a body; but this body is not a husk having no part in
 soul, not a thing that earlier lay away in the soulless; the body
 had its aptitude and by this draws near: now it is not body merely,
 but living body. By this neighboring it is enhanced with some
 impress of soul- not in the sense of a portion of soul entering into
 it, but that it is warmed and lit by soul entire: at once 
 there is the
 ground of desire, pleasure, pain; the body of the living 
 form that has
 come to be was certainly no unrelated thing.
 
 The soul, sprung from the divine, lay self-enclosed at 
 peace, true
 to its own quality; but its neighbour, in uproar through weakness,
 instable of its own nature and beaten upon from without, cries, at
 first to itself and afterwards upon the living total, spreading the
 disorder at large. Thus, at an assembly the Elders may sit 
 in tranquil
 meditation, but an unruly populace, crying for food and casting up a
 host of grievances, will bring the whole gathering into ugly
 turmoil; when this sort of people hold their peace so that a 
 word from
 a man of sense may reach them, some passable order is 
 restored and the
 baser part ceases to prevail; otherwise the silence of the better
 allows the rabble to rule, the distracted assembly unable to take
 the word from above.
 
 This is the evil of state and of council: and this is the evil
 of man; man includes an inner rabble- pleasures, desires, fears- and
 these become masters when the man, the manifold, gives them play.
 
 But one that has reduced his rabble and gone back to the Man he
 was, lives to that and is that Man again, so that what he allows to
 the body is allowed as to something separate.
 
 There is the man, too, that lives partly in the one 
 allegiance and
 partly in the other; he is a blend of the good that is himself with
 the evil that is alien.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. But if that Principle can never fall to evil and we 
 have given
 a true account of the soul's entry or presence to body, what 
 are we to
 say of the periodic Descents and Returns, the punishments, the
 banishment into animal forms? That teaching we have inherited from
 those ancient philosophers who have best probed into soul and we
 must try to show that our own doctrine is accordant with it, or at
 least not conflicting.
 
 We have seen that the participation of things here in that
 higher means not that the soul has gone outside of itself to 
 enter the
 corporeal, but that the corporeal has approached soul and is now
 participant in it; the coming affirmed by the ancients can be only
 that approach of the body to the higher by which it partakes of life
 and of soul; this has nothing to do with local entry but is some
 form of communion; by the descent and embodiment of current phrasing
 must be understood not that soul becomes an appanage of body but
 that it gives out to it something of itself; similarly, the soul's
 departure is the complete cessation of that communion.
 
 The various rankings of the universe will determine various
 degrees of the communion; soul, ultimate of the Intellectual, will
 give forth freely to body as being more nearly of the one power and
 standing closer, as distance holds in that order.
 
 The soul's evil will be this association, its good the release.
 Why? Because, even unmerged, a soul in any way to be described as
 attached to this universe is in some degree fallen from the 
 All into a
 state of partition; essentially belonging to the All, it no longer
 directs its act Thither: thus, a man's knowledge is one whole, but
 he may guide himself by no more than some single item of it, 
 where his
 good would lie in living not by some such fragment but by 
 the total of
 his knowing.
 
 That One Soul- member of the Intellectual kosmos and 
 there merging
 what it has of partial into the total- has broken away, so to speak,
 from the All to the part and to that devotes itself becoming partial
 with it: thus fire that might consume everything may be set 
 to ply its
 all-power upon some trifle. So long as the soul remains utterly
 unattached it is soul not singled out; when it has accepted
 separation- not that of place but that of act determining
 individualities- it is a part, no longer the soul entire, or at
 least not entire in the first sense; when, on the contrary, it
 exercises no such outward control it is perfectly the All-Soul, the
 partial in it latent.
 
 As for the entry into the World of the Shades, if this means
 into the unseen, that is its release; if into some lower place,
 there is nothing strange in that, since even here the soul 
 is taken to
 be where the body is, in place with the body.
 
 But on the dissolution of the body?
 
 So long as the image-soul has not been discarded, clearly the
 higher will be where that is; if, on the contrary, the 
 higher has been
 completely emancipated by philosophic discipline, the image-soul may
 very well go alone to that lower place, the authentic passing
 uncontaminated into the Intellectual, separated from that image but
 nonetheless the soul entire.
 
 Let the image-offspring of the individuality- fare as it may,
 the true soul when it turns its light upon itself, chooses the
 higher and by that choice blends into the All, neither acting now
 nor extinct.
 
 But it is time to return to our main theme:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 FIFTH TRACTATE
 
 
 ON THE INTEGRAL OMNIPRESENCE OF THE
 
 AUTHENTIC EXISTENT (2).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. The integral omnipresence of a unity numerically identical is
 in fact universally received; for all men instinctively 
 affirm the god
 in each of us to be one, the same in all. It would be taken 
 as certain
 if no one asked How or sought to bring the conviction to the test of
 reasoning; with this effective in their thought, men would 
 be at rest,
 finding their stay in that oneness and identity, so that 
 nothing would
 wrench them from this unity. This principle, indeed, is the most
 solidly established of all, proclaimed by our very souls; we do not
 piece it up item by item, but find it within beforehand; it precedes
 even the principle by which we affirm unquestionably that all things
 seek their good; for this universal quest of good depends on the
 fact that all aim at unity and possess unity and that universally
 effort is towards unity.
 
 Now this unity in going forth, so far as it may, towards 
 the Other
 Order must become manifest as multiplicity and in some sense become
 multiple; but the primal nature and the appetition of the good,
 which is appetition of unity, lead back to what is authentically
 one; to this every form of Being is urged in a movement towards its
 own reality. For the good to every nature possessing unity is to be
 self-belonging, to be itself, and that means to be a unity.
 
 In virtue of that unity the Good may be regarded as truly
 inherent. Hence the Good is not to be sought outside; it could not
 have fallen outside of what is; it cannot possibly be found in
 non-Being; within Being the Good must lie, since it is never a
 non-Being.
 
 If that Good has Being and is within the realm of Being, then it
 is present, self-contained, in everything: we, therefore, need not
 look outside of Being; we are in it; yet that Good is not
 exclusively ours: therefore all beings are one.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Now the reasoning faculty which undertakes this problem is
 not a unity but a thing of parts; it brings the bodily 
 nature into the
 enquiry, borrowing its principles from the corporeal: thus it thinks
 of the Essential Existence as corporeal and as a thing of parts; it
 baulks at the unity because it does not start from the appropriate
 principles. We, however, must be careful to bring the appropriately
 convincing principles to the discussion of the Unity, of perfect
 Being: we must hold to the Intellectual principles which alone apply
 to the Intellectual Order and to Real Being.
 
 On the one hand there is the unstable, exposed to all sorts of
 change, distributed in place, not so much Being as Becoming: on the
 other, there is that which exists eternally, not divided, subject to
 no change of state, neither coming into being nor falling 
 from it, set
 in no region or place or support, emerging from nowhere, 
 entering into
 nothing, fast within itself.
 
 In dealing with that lower order we would reason from its own
 nature and the characteristics it exhibits; thus, on a plausible
 foundation, we achieve plausible results by a plausible system of
 deduction: similarly, in dealing with the Intellectual, the only way
 is to grasp the nature of the essence concerned and so lay the sure
 foundations of the argument, not forgetfully straying over into that
 other order but basing our treatment on what is essential to the
 Nature with which we deal.
 
 In every entity the essential nature is the governing principle
 and, as we are told, a sound definition brings to light many even of
 the concomitants: where the essential nature is the entire being, we
 must be all the more careful to keep to that, to look to that, to
 refer all to that.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. If this principle is the Authentic Existent and holds
 unchanging identity, does not go forth from itself, is untouched by
 any process of becoming or, as we have said, by any situation in
 place, then it must be always self-gathered, never in separation,
 not partly here and partly there, not giving forth from itself: any
 such instability would set it in thing after thing or at least in
 something other than itself: then it would no longer be 
 self-gathered;
 nor would it be immune, for anything within which it were 
 lodged would
 affect it; immune, it is not in anything. If, then, not standing
 away from itself, not distributed by part, not taking the slightest
 change, it is to be in many things while remaining a 
 self-concentrated
 entire, there is some way in which it has multipresence; it 
 is at once
 self-enclosed and not so: the only way is to recognise that 
 while this
 principle itself is not lodged in anything, all other things
 participate in it- all that are apt and in the measure of their
 aptitude.
 
 Thus, we either cancel all that we have affirmed and the
 principles laid down, and deny the existence of any such Nature, or,
 that being impossible, we return to our first position:
 
 The One, numerically identical, undistributed, an 
 unbroken entire,
 yet stands remote from nothing that exists by its side; but it does
 not, for that, need to pour itself forth: there is no 
 necessity either
 that certain portions of it enter into things or again that, while
 it remains self-abiding, something produced and projected from it
 enter at various points into that other order. Either would imply
 something of it remaining there while the emanant is elsewhere: thus
 separated from what has gone forth, it would experience local
 division. And would those emanants be, each in itself, whole or
 part? If part, the One has lost its nature, that of an entire, as we
 have already indicated; if whole, then either the whole is broken up
 to coincide point for point with that in which it is become 
 present or
 we are admitting that an unbroken identity can be omnipresent.
 
 This is a reasoning, surely, founded on the thing itself and its
 essential nature, not introducing anything foreign, anything 
 belonging
 to the Other Order.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. Then consider this god [in man] whom we cannot think to be
 absent at some point and present at another. All that have insight
 into the nature of the divine beings hold the omnipresence 
 of this god
 and of all the gods, and reason assures us that so it must be.
 
 Now all-pervasion is inconsistent with partition; that would
 mean no longer the god throughout but part of the god at one 
 point and
 part at another; the god ceases to be one god, just as a mass cut up
 ceases to be a mass, the parts no longer giving the first total.
 Further, the god becomes corporeal.
 
 If all this is impossible, the disputed doctrine presents itself
 again; holding the god to pervade the Being of man, we hold the
 omnipresence of an integral identity.
 
 Again, if we think of the divine nature as infinite- and 
 certainly
 it is confined by no bounds- this must mean that it nowhere 
 fails; its
 presence must reach to everything; at the point to which it does not
 reach, there it has failed; something exists in which it is not.
 
 Now, admitting any sequent to the absolute unity, that sequent
 must be bound up with the absolute; any third will be about that
 second and move towards it, linked to it as its offspring. 
 In this way
 all participants in the Later will have share in the First. 
 The Beings
 of the Intellectual are thus a plurality of firsts and seconds and
 thirds attached like one sphere to one centre, not separated by
 interval but mutually present; where, therefore, the Intellectual
 tertiaries are present, the secondaries and firsts are present too.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. Often for the purpose of exposition- as a help towards
 stating the nature of the produced multiplicity- we use the 
 example of
 many lines radiating from one centre; but, while we provide for
 individualization, we must carefully preserve mutual 
 presence. Even in
 the case of our circle we need not think of separated radii; all may
 be taken as forming one surface: where there is no distinction even
 upon the one surface but all is power and reality undifferentiated,
 all the beings may be thought of as centres uniting at one central
 centre: we ignore the radial lines and think of their terminals at
 that centre, where they are at one. Restore the radii; once more we
 have lines, each touching a generating centre of its own, but that
 centre remains coincident with the one first centre; the centres all
 unite in that first centre and yet remain what they were, so 
 that they
 are as many as are the lines to which they serve as terminals; the
 centres themselves appear as numerous as the lines starting from gem
 and yet all those centres constitute a unity.
 
 Thus we may liken the Intellectual Beings in their diversity to
 many centres coinciding with the one centre and themselves at one in
 it but appearing multiple on account of the radial lines- lines
 which do not generate the centres but merely lead to them. The
 radii, thus, afford a serviceable illustration for the mode 
 of contact
 by which the Intellectual Unity manifests itself as multiple and
 multipresent.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. The Intellectual Beings, thus, are multiple and one; in
 virtue of their infinite nature their unity is a 
 multiplicity, many in
 one and one over many, a unit-plurality. They act as entire upon
 entire; even upon the partial thing they act as entire; but there is
 the difference that at first the partial accepts this working only
 partially though the entire enters later. Thus, when Man enters into
 human form there exists a particular man who, however, is still Man.
 From the one thing Man- man in the Idea- material man has come to
 constitute many individual men: the one identical thing is present
 in multiplicity, in multi-impression, so to speak, from the one seal.
 
 This does not mean that Man Absolute, or any Absolute, or the
 Universe in the sense of a Whole, is absorbed by multiplicity; on
 the contrary, the multiplicity is absorbed by the Absolute, or
 rather is bound up with it. There is a difference between the mode
 in which a colour may be absorbed by a substance entire and that in
 which the soul of the individual is identically present in every
 part of the body: it is in this latter mode that Being is 
 omnipresent.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. To Real Being we go back, all that we have and are; to that
 we return as from that we came. Of what is There we have direct
 knowledge, not images or even impressions; and to know without image
 is to be; by our part in true knowledge we are those Beings; 
 we do not
 need to bring them down into ourselves, for we are There among them.
 Since not only ourselves but all other things also are those Beings,
 we all are they; we are they while we are also one with all: 
 therefore
 we and all things are one.
 
 When we look outside of that on which we depend we ignore our
 unity; looking outward we see many faces; look inward and all is the
 one head. If man could but be turned about by his own motion 
 or by the
 happy pull of Athene- he would see at once God and himself and the
 All. At first no doubt all will not be seen as one whole, but when
 we find no stop at which to declare a limit to our being we cease to
 rule ourselves out from the total of reality; we reach to 
 the All as a
 unity- and this not by any stepping forward, but by the fact of
 being and abiding there where the All has its being.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. For my part I am satisfied that anyone considering the mode
 in which Matter participates in the Ideas will be ready enough to
 accept this tenet of omnipresence in identity, no longer rejecting
 it as incredible or even difficult. This because it seems reasonable
 and imperative to dismiss any notion of the Ideas lying apart with
 Matter illumined from them as from somewhere above- a meaningless
 conception, for what have distance and separation to do here?
 
 This participation cannot be thought of as elusive or very
 perplexing; on the contrary, it is obvious, accessible in many
 examples.
 
 Note, however, that when we sometimes speak of the Ideas
 illuminating Matter this is not to suggest the mode in which
 material light pours down on a material object; we use the phrase in
 the sense only that, the material being image while the Ideas are
 archetypes, the two orders are distinguished somewhat in the 
 manner of
 illuminant and illuminated. But it is time to be more exact.
 
 We do not mean that the Idea, locally separate, shows itself in
 Matter like a reflection in water; the Matter touches the Idea at
 every point, though not in a physical contact, and, by dint of
 neighbourhood- nothing to keep them apart- is able to absorb thence
 all that lies within its capacity, the Idea itself not penetrating,
 not approaching, the Matter, but remaining self-locked.
 
 We take it, then, that the Idea, say of Fire- for we had 
 best deal
 with Matter as underlying the elements- is not in the Matter. The
 Ideal Fire, then, remaining apart, produces the form of fire
 throughout the entire enfired mass. Now let us suppose- and the same
 method will apply to all the so-called elements- that this 
 Fire in its
 first material manifestation is a multiple mass. That single Fire is
 seen producing an image of itself in all the sensible fires; 
 yet it is
 not spatially separate; it does not, then, produce that image in the
 manner of our visible light; for in that case all this sensible
 fire, supposing that it were a whole of parts [as the analogy would
 necessitate], must have generated spatial positions out of itself,
 since the Idea or Form remains in a non-spatial world; for a 
 principle
 thus pluralized must first have departed from its own character in
 order to be present in that many and participate many times 
 in the one
 same Form.
 
 The Idea, impartible, gives nothing of itself to the Matter; its
 unbreaking unity, however, does not prevent it shaping that multiple
 by its own unity and being present to the entirety of the multiple,
 bringing it to pattern not by acting part upon part but by presence
 entire to the object entire. It would be absurd to introduce a
 multitude of Ideas of Fire, each several fire being shaped by a
 particular idea; the Ideas of fire would be infinite. Besides, how
 would these resultant fires be distinct, when fire is a continuous
 unity? and if we apply yet another fire to certain matter and
 produce a greater fire, then the same Idea must be allowed to have
 functioned in the same way in the new matter as in the old;
 obviously there is no other Idea.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. The elements in their totality, as they stand produced, may
 be thought of as one spheric figure; this cannot be the piecemeal
 product of many makers each working from some one point on some one
 portion. There must be one cause; and this must operate as an
 entire, not by part executing part; otherwise we are brought 
 back to a
 plurality of makers. The making must be referred to a partless
 unity, or, more precisely, the making principle must be a partless
 unity not permeating the sphere but holding it as one 
 dependent thing.
 In this way the sphere is enveloped by one identical life in which
 it is inset; its entire content looks to the one life: thus all the
 souls are one, a one, however, which yet is infinite.
 
 It is in this understanding that the soul has been taken to be a
 numerical principle, while others think of it as in its nature a
 self-increasing number; this latter notion is probably designed to
 meet the consideration that the soul at no point fails but,
 retaining its distinctive character, is ample for all, so 
 much so that
 were the kosmos vaster yet the virtue of soul would still compass
 it- or rather the kosmos still be sunk in soul entire.
 
 Of course, we must understand this adding of extension not as a
 literal increase but in the sense that the soul, essentially a
 unity, becomes adequate to omnipresence; its unity sets it outside
 of quantitative measurement, the characteristic of that other order
 which has but a counterfeit unity, an appearance by participation.
 
 The essential unity is no aggregate to be annulled upon the loss
 of some one of the constituents; nor is it held within any allotted
 limits, for so it would be the less for a set of things, more
 extensive than itself, outside its scope; or it must wrench itself
 asunder in the effort to reach to all; besides, its presence 
 to things
 would be no longer as whole to all but by part to part; in vulgar
 phrase, it does not know where it stands; dismembered, it no longer
 performs any one single function.
 
 Now if this principle is to be a true unity- where the 
 unity is of
 the essence- it must in some way be able to manifest itself as
 including the contrary nature, that of potential multiplicity, while
 by the fact that this multiplicity belongs to it not as from without
 but as from and by itself, it remains authentically one, possessing
 boundlessness and multiplicity within that unity; its nature must be
 such that it can appear as a whole at every point; this, as
 encircled by a single self-embracing Reason-Principle, which holds
 fast about that unity, never breaking with itself but over all the
 universe remaining what it must be.
 
 The unity is in this way saved from the local division of the
 things in which it appears; and, of course, existing before all that
 is in place, it could never be founded upon anything 
 belonging to that
 order of which, on the contrary, it is the foundation; yet, for all
 that they are based upon it, it does not cease to be wholly
 self-gathered; if its fixed seat were shaken, all the rest would
 fall with the fall of their foundation and stay; nor could it be so
 unintelligent as to tear itself apart by such a movement and, secure
 within its own being, trust itself to the insecurity of place which,
 precisely, looks to it for safety.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. It remains, then, poised in wisdom within itself; it 
 could not
 enter into any other; those others look to it and in their longing
 find it where it is. This is that "Love Waiting at the Door," ever
 coming up from without, striving towards the beautiful, happy when
 to the utmost of its power it attains. Even here the lover 
 does not so
 much possess himself of the beauty he has loved as wait before it;
 that Beauty is abidingly self-enfolded but its lovers, the Many,
 loving it as an entire, possess it as an entire when they attain,
 for it was an entire that they loved. This seclusion does not
 prevent its sufficing to all, but is the very reason for its 
 adequacy;
 because it is thus entire for all it can be The Good to all.
 
 Similarly wisdom is entire to all; it is one thing; it is not
 distributed parcelwise; it cannot be fixed to place; it is not
 spread about like a colouring, for it is not corporeal; in any true
 participation in wisdom there must be one thing acting as unit upon
 unit. So must it be in our participation in the One; we 
 shall not take
 our several portions of it, nor you some separate entire and I
 another. Think of what happens in Assemblies and all kinds of
 meetings; the road to sense is the road to unity; singly the members
 are far from wise; as they begin to grow together, each, in that
 true growth, generates wisdom while he recognizes it. There 
 is nothing
 to prevent our intelligences meeting at one centre from their
 several positions; all one, they seem apart to us as when without
 looking we touch one object or sound one string with 
 different fingers
 and think we feel several. Or take our souls in their possession of
 good; it is not one good for me and another for you; it is the same
 for both and not in the sense merely of distinct products of an
 identical source, the good somewhere above with something streaming
 from it into us; in any real receiving of good, giver is in contact
 with taker and gives not as to a recipient outside but to one in
 intimate contact.
 
 The Intellectual giving is not an act of transmission; 
 even in the
 case of corporeal objects, with their local separation, the mutual
 giving [and taking] is of things of one order and their 
 communication,
 every effect they produce, is upon their like; what is corporeal in
 the All acts and is acted upon within itself, nothing external
 impinging upon it. Now if in body, whose very nature is partition,
 there is no incursion of the alien, how can there be any in the
 order in which no partition exists?
 
 It is therefore by identification that we see the good and touch
 it, brought to it by becoming identical with what is of the
 Intellectual within ourselves. In that realm exists what is far more
 truly a kosmos of unity; otherwise there will be two sensible
 universes, divided into correspondent parts; the Intellectual
 sphere, if a unity only as this sphere is, will be undistinguishable
 from it- except, indeed, that it will be less worthy of respect
 since in the nature of things extension is appropriate in the lower
 while the Intellectual will have wrought out its own 
 extension with no
 motive, in a departure from its very character.
 
 And what is there to hinder this unification? There is 
 no question
 of one member pushing another out as occupying too much space, any
 more than happens in our own minds where we take in the entire fruit
 of our study and observation, all uncrowded.
 
 We may be told that this unification is not possible in Real
 Beings; it certainly would not be possible, if the Reals had
 extension.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. But how can the unextended reach over the defined 
 extension of
 the corporeal? How can it, so, maintain itself as a unity, an
 identity?
 
 This is a problem often raised and reason calls vehemently for a
 solution of the difficulties involved. The fact stands abundantly
 evident, but there is still the need of intellectual satisfaction.
 
 We have, of course, no slight aid to conviction, indeed the very
 strongest, in the exposition of the character of that 
 principle. It is
 not like a stone, some vast block lying where it lies, covering the
 space of its own extension, held within its own limits, 
 having a fixed
 quantity of mass and of assigned stone-power. It is a First 
 Principle,
 measureless, not bounded within determined size- such measurement
 belongs to another order- and therefore it is all-power, 
 nowhere under
 limit. Being so, it is outside of Time.
 
 Time in its ceaseless onward sliding produces parted interval;
 Eternity stands in identity, pre-eminent, vaster by unending power
 than Time with all the vastness of its seeming progress; Time is
 like a radial line running out apparently to infinity but dependent
 upon that, its centre, which is the pivot of all its movement; as it
 goes it tells of that centre, but the centre itself is the unmoving
 principle of all the movement.
 
 Time stands, thus, in analogy with the principle which holds
 fast in unchanging identity of essence: but that principle 
 is infinite
 not only in duration but also in power: this infinity of power must
 also have its counterpart, a principle springing from that infinite
 power and dependent upon it; this counterpart will, after its own
 mode, run a course- corresponding to the course of Time- in keeping
 with that stationary power which is its greater as being its source:
 and in this too the source is present throughout the full 
 extension of
 its lower correspondent.
 
 This secondary of Power, participating as far as it may in that
 higher, must be identified.
 
 Now the higher power is present integrally but, in the 
 weakness of
 the recipient material, is not discerned as every point; it 
 is present
 as an identity everywhere not in the mode of the material triangle-
 identical though, in many representations, numerically multiple, but
 in the mode of the immaterial, ideal triangle which is the source of
 the material figures. If we are asked why the omnipresence of the
 immaterial triangle does not entail that of the material figure, we
 answer that not all Matter enters into the participation necessary;
 Matter accepts various forms and not all Matter is apt for all form;
 the First Matter, for example, does not lend itself to all but is
 for the First Kinds first and for the others in due order, though
 these, too, are omnipresent.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. To return: How is that Power present to the universe?
 
 As a One Life.
 
 Consider the life in any living thing; it does not reach only to
 some fixed point, unable to permeate the entire being; it is
 omnipresent. If on this again we are asked How, we appeal to the
 character of this power, not subject to quantity but such that
 though you divide it mentally for ever you still have the same
 power, infinite to the core; in it there is no Matter to make it
 grow less and less according to the measured mass.
 
 Conceive it as a power of an ever-fresh infinity, a principle
 unfailing, inexhaustible, at no point giving out, brimming over with
 its own vitality. If you look to some definite spot and seek 
 to fasten
 on some definite thing, you will not find it. The contrary is your
 only way; you cannot pass on to where it is not; you will never halt
 at a dwindling point where it fails at last and can no longer give;
 you will always be able to move with it- better, to be in its
 entirety- and so seek no further; denying it, you have 
 strayed away to
 something of another order and you fall; looking elsewhere you do
 not see what stands there before you.
 
 But supposing you do thus "seek no further," how do you 
 experience
 it?
 
 In that you have entered into the All, no longer content with
 the part; you cease to think of yourself as under limit but, laying
 all such determination aside, you become an All. No doubt you were
 always that, but there has been an addition and by that addition you
 are diminished; for the addition was not from the realm of Being-
 you can add nothing to Being- but from non-Being. It is not by some
 admixture of non-Being that one becomes an entire, but by putting
 non-Being away. By the lessening of the alien in you, you increase.
 Cast it aside and there is the All within you; engaged in the alien,
 you will not find the All. Not that it has to come and so be present
 to you; it is you that have turned from it. And turn though you may,
 you have not severed yourself; it is there; you are not in some far
 region: still there before it, you have faced to its contrary.
 
 It is so with the lesser gods; of many standing in their
 presence it is often one alone that sees them; that one alone was
 alone in the power to see. These are the gods who "in many 
 guises seek
 our cities"; but there is That Other whom the cities seek, 
 and all the
 earth and heaven, everywhere with God and in Him, possessing through
 Him their Being and the Real Beings about them, down to soul 
 and life,
 all bound to Him and so moving to that unity which by its 
 very lack of
 extension is infinite.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SIXTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON NUMBERS.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. It is suggested that multiplicity is a falling away from The
 Unity, infinity being the complete departure, an innumerable
 multiplicity, and that this is why unlimit is an evil and we evil at
 the stage of multiplicity.
 
 A thing, in fact, becomes a manifold when, unable to remain
 self-centred, it flows outward and by that dissipation takes
 extension: utterly losing unity it becomes a manifold since there is
 nothing to bind part to part; when, with all this outflowing, it
 becomes something definite, there is a magnitude.
 
 But what is there so grievous in magnitude?
 
 Given consciousness, there will be, since the thing must feel
 its exile, its sundrance from its essence. Everything seeks not the
 alien but itself; in that outward moving there is frustration or
 compulsion; a thing most exists not when it takes multiplicity or
 extension but when it holds to its own being, that is when its
 movement is inward. Desire towards extension is ignorance of the
 authentically great, a movement not on the appropriate path but
 towards the strange; to the possession of the self the way is inward.
 
 Consider the thing that has taken extension; broken into so many
 independent items, it is now those several parts and not the thing
 it was; if that original is to persist, the members must stand
 collected to their total; in other words, a thing is itself not by
 being extended but by remaining, in its degree, a unity: through
 expansion and in the measure of the expansion, it is less itself;
 retaining unity, it retains its essential being.
 
 Yet the universe has at once extension and beauty?
 
 Yes; because it has not been allowed to slip away into the
 limitless but is held fast by unity; and it has beauty in virtue of
 Beauty not of Magnitude; it needed Beauty to parry that magnitude;
 in the degree of its extension it was void of beauty and to that
 degree ugly. Thus extension serves as Matter to Beauty since what
 calls for its ordering is a multiplicity. The greater the expansion,
 the greater the disorder and ugliness.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. What, then, of the "Number of the Infinite"?
 
 To begin with, how is Number consistent with infinity?
 
 Objects of sense are not unlimited and therefore the Number
 applying to them cannot be so. Nor is an enumerator able to number
 to infinity; though we double, multiply over and over again, we
 still end with a finite number; though we range over past and
 future, and consider them, even, as a totality, we still end with
 the finite.
 
 Are we then to dismiss absolute limitlessness and think merely
 that there is always something beyond?
 
 No; that more is not in the reckoner's power to produce; 
 the total
 stands already defined.
 
 In the Intellectual the Beings are determined and with them
 Number, the number corresponding to their total; in this 
 sphere of our
 own- as we make a man a multiple by counting up his various
 characteristics, his beauty and the rest- we take each image of
 Being and form a corresponding image of number; we multiply a
 non-existent in and so produce multiple numbers; if we 
 number years we
 draw on the numbers in our own minds and apply them to the years;
 these numbers are still our possession.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. And there is the question How can the infinite have existence
 and remain unlimited: whatever is in actual existence is by that
 very fact determined numerically.
 
 But, first, if multiplicity holds a true place among Beings, how
 can it be an evil?
 
 As existent it possesses unity; it is a unit-multiple, saved
 from stark multiplicity; but it is of a lessened unity and, by that
 inwoven multiplicity, it is evil in comparison with unity pure. No
 longer steadfast in that nature, but fallen, it is the less, while
 in virtue of the unity thence retained it keeps some value;
 multiplicity has value in so far as it tends to return to, unity.
 
 But how explain the unlimited? It would seem that either it is
 among beings and so is limited or, if unlimited, is not among beings
 but, at best, among things of process such as Time. To be brought to
 limit it must be unlimited; not the limited but the unlimited is the
 subject of limitation, since between the limited and the unlimited
 there is no intermediate to accept the principle of limitation. The
 unlimited recoils by very nature from the Idea of limit, 
 though it may
 be caught and held by it from without:- the recoil, of course, is
 not from one place to another; the limitless can have nothing to do
 with place which arises only with the limiting of the 
 unlimited. Hence
 what is known as the flux of the unlimited is not to be understood
 as local change; nor does any other sort of recognisable 
 motion belong
 to it in itself; therefore the limitless cannot move: neither can it
 be at rest: in what, since all place is later? Its movement means
 little more than that it is not fixed in rest.
 
 Is it, then, suspended at some one point, or rocking to and fro?
 
 No; any such poising, with or without side motion, could be
 known only by place [which Matter precedes].
 
 How, then, are we to form any conception of its being?
 
 We must fasten on the bare notion and take what that gives us-
 opposites that still are not opposed: we think of large and small
 and the unlimited becomes either, of stationary and moving, and it
 will be either of these. But primarily it can be neither in any
 defined degree, or at once it is under limit. Limitless in this
 unlimited and undefined way, it is able to appear as either of a
 pair of opposites: draw near, taking care to throw no net of limit
 over it, and you have something that slips away; you come upon no
 unity for so it would be defined; approach the thing as a unit, and
 you find it manifold; call it a manifold, and again you falsify, for
 when the single thing is not a unity neither is the total a
 manifold. In one manifestation it takes the appearance of 
 movement, in
 another of rest, as the mind envisages it.
 
 And there is movement in its lack of consciousness; it has
 passed out of Intellectual-Principle, slid away. That it cannot
 break free but is under compulsion from without to keep to its
 circling with no possibility of advance, in this would be its rest.
 Thus it is not true to speak of Matter as being solely in flux.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. We have to enquire into the existence of the Numbers in the
 Intellectual. Are they Ideas added to the other Ideas? Or are they
 no more than necessary concomitants to the Ideas?
 
 In the latter case, Being, as the first [in the Intellectual]
 would give us the conception of the Monad; then since Being produces
 motion and rest, Three exists; and so on for all the other members
 of the realm of Being. Or perhaps there is one monad for each
 member, or a monad for the first, with a dyad for its next, since
 there exists a series, and a corresponding number for every 
 successive
 total, decad for ten, and so on.
 
 If, on the contrary, Number is a direct production of the
 Intellectual-Principle [an Idea in itself], there is the question
 whether it preceded or followed the other Ideas.
 
 Plato, where he says that men arrived at the conception of
 Number by way of the changes of day and night- thus making 
 the concept
 depend upon variation among things- seems to hold that the things
 numerable precede and by their differences produce number: 
 Number then
 would consist in a process within the human mind passing onwards
 from thing to thing; it results by the fact that the mind 
 takes count,
 that is when the mind traverses things and reports their
 differences; observing pure identity unbroken by difference, it says
 One. But there is the passage where he tells us that the veritable
 Number has Being, is a Being; this is the opposed view that Number
 is no product of the reckoning mind but a reality in itself, the
 concept of which is reawakened in the mind by changes in things of
 sense.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. What then is the veritable nature of Number?
 
 Is it an accompaniment upon each substance, something seen in
 the things as in a man we see one man, in a being one being 
 and in the
 total of presentations the total of number?
 
 But how explain the dyad and triad? How comes the total to be
 unitary and any particular number to be brought under unity? The
 theory offers a multiplicity of units, and no number is reducible to
 unity but the simple "one." It might be suggested that a dyad is
 that thing- or rather what is observed upon that thing- which has
 two powers combined, a compound thing related to a unity: or numbers
 might be what the Pythagoreans seem to hold them in their symbolic
 system in which Justice, for example, is a Tetrad: but this is
 rather to add the number, a number of manifold unity like the
 decad, to the multiplicity of the thing which yet is one thing. Now
 it is not so that we treat the ten things; we bring them together
 and apply the figure ten to the several items. Or rather in that
 case we say ten, but when the several items form a unity we say
 decad. This would apply in the Intellectual as in the sensible.
 
 But how then can number, observed upon things, rank among Real
 Beings?
 
 One answer might be that whiteness is similarly observed upon
 things and yet is real, just as movement is observed upon things and
 there is still a real existence of movement. But movement is not on
 a par with number: it is because movement is an entity that unity
 can be observed upon it. Besides, the kind of real existence thus
 implied annuls the reality of number, making it no more than an
 attribute; but that cannot be since an attribute must exist before
 it can be attributed; it may be inseparable from the subject 
 but still
 must in itself be something, some entity as whiteness is; to be a
 predicate it must be that which is to be predicated. Thus if unity
 is observed in every subject, and "one man" says more than "man's
 oneness being different from the manness and common to all things-
 then this oneness must be something prior to man and to all the
 rest: only so can the unity come to apply to each and to all: it
 must therefore be prior also to even movement, prior to Being, since
 without unity these could not be each one thing: of course what is
 here meant is not the unity postulated as transcending Being but the
 unity predicable of the Ideas which constitute each several thing.
 So too there is a decad prior to the subject in which we affirm it;
 this prior would be the decad absolute, for certainly the thing in
 which the decad is observed is not that absolute.
 
 Is this unity, then, connate and coexistent to the 
 Beings? Suppose
 it coexistent merely as an accidental, like health in man, it still
 must exist of itself; suppose it present as an element in a
 compound, there must first exist unity and the unity 
 absolute that can
 thus enter into composition; moreover if it were compounded with an
 object brought into being by its agency it would make that 
 object only
 spuriously a unity; its entry would produce a duality.
 
 But what of the decad? Where lies the need of decad to a thing
 which, by totalling to that power, is decad already?
 
 The need may be like that of Form to Matter; ten and decad may
 exist by its virtue; and, once more, the decad must previously
 exist of its own existence, decad unattached.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. Granted, then, that there exist, apart from things, a unity
 absolute and a decad absolute in other words, that the Intellectual
 beings, together with their characteristic essence have also their
 order, Henads, Dyads, Triads, what is the nature of these numerical
 entities and how does it come into being? We cannot but think that
 some reason accounts for their origin.
 
 As a beginning, what is the origin of the Ideas in general? It
 is not that the thinking principle thought of each Idea and by that
 act of thought procured their several existences; not because
 Justice and Movement were thus thought did they come to be; 
 that would
 imply that while the thought is later than the thing- the concept of
 Justice must be later than Justice itself- yet the thought precedes
 what, as founded on the thinking, owes its existence to it. Besides,
 if justice is only a certain definite thought we have the absurdity
 that Justice is nothing more than a definition of Justice. 
 Thinking of
 Justice or Movement is but grasping their nature; this would mean
 grasping the non-existent, an impossibility.
 
 We may be reminded that in immaterial objects the knowledge is
 identical with the thing; but we must not misapply that statement;
 it does not say that the knowledge is the thing known, or that the
 reason surveying the thing is the thing, but that the immaterial
 thing, being an Intellectual object is also a thought; this does not
 imply a definition or conception of the object; the thing itself, as
 belonging to the Intellectual, can be nothing else than Intellect or
 knowledge. This is not a case of knowledge self-directed; it is that
 the thing in the Intellectual transmutes the knowledge, which is not
 fixed like the knowledge of material things; in other words it makes
 it true knowledge, that is to say no image of the thing but the
 thing directly.
 
 Thus it is not the conception of movement that brings movement
 to be; movement absolute produces that conception; it produces
 itself as at once movement and the concept of movement, for movement
 as it exists There, bound up with Being, is a concept. It is
 movement absolute because it is the first movement- there can be
 none till this exist- and it is the authentic Movement since 
 it is not
 accidental to something else but is the activity of actual Being in
 motion. Thus it is a real existent, though the notion of Being is
 different.
 
 Justice therefore is not the thought of Justice but, as 
 we may put
 it, a state of the Intellectual-Principle, or rather an activity of
 it- an appearance so lovely that neither evening nor dawn is so
 fair, nor anything else in all the realm of sense, an Intellectual
 manifestation self-rising, self-seen, or, rather, self-being.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. It is inevitably necessary to think of all as contained
 within one nature; one nature must hold and encompass all; there
 cannot be as in the realm of sense thing apart from thing, here a
 sun and elsewhere something else; all must be mutually present
 within a unity. This is the very nature of the
 Intellectual-Principle as we may know from soul which reproduces it
 and from what we call Nature under which and by which the things of
 process are brought into their disjointed being while that Nature
 itself remains indissolubly one.
 
 But within the unity There, the several entities have 
 each its own
 distinct existence; the all-embracing Intellect sees what is in it,
 what is within Being; it need not look out upon them since 
 it contains
 them, need not separate them since they stand for ever 
 distinct within
 it.
 
 Against doubters we cite the fact of participation; the
 greatness and beauty of the Intellectual-Principle we know by the
 soul's longing towards it; the longing of the rest towards 
 soul is set
 up by its likeness to its higher and to the possibility open to them
 of attaining resemblance through it.
 
 It is surely inconceivable that any living thing be beautiful
 failing a Life-Absolute of a wonderful, an ineffable, beauty: this
 must be the Collective Life, made up of all living things, or
 embracing all, forming a unity coextensive with all, as our universe
 is a unity embracing all the visible.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. As then there is a Life-Form primal- which therefore is the
 Life-Form Absolute- and there is Intellectual-Principle or Being,
 Authentic Being, these, we affirm, contain all living things and all
 Number, and Absolute Justice and Beauty and all of that order; for
 we ascribe an existence of their own to Absolute Man, 
 Absolute Number,
 Absolute Justice. It remains to discover, in so far as such
 knowledge is possible, how these distinct entities come to 
 be and what
 is the manner of their being.
 
 At the outset we must lay aside all sense-perception; by
 Intellectual-Principle we know Intellectual-Principle. We reflect
 within ourselves there is life, there is intellect, not in extension
 but as power without magnitude, issue of Authentic Being which is
 power self-existing, no vacuity but a thing most living and
 intellective- nothing more living, more intelligent, more real- and
 producing its effect by contact and in the ratio of the contact,
 closely to the close, more remotely to the remote. If Being is to be
 sought, then most be sought is Being at its intensest; so too the
 intensest of Intellect if the Intellectual act has worth; 
 and so, too,
 of Life.
 
 First, then, we take Being as first in order; then
 Intellectual-Principle; then the Living-Form considered as
 containing all things: Intellectual-Principle, as the Act of Real
 Being, is a second.
 
 Thus it is clear that Number cannot be dependent upon the
 Living-Form since unity and duality existed before that; nor does it
 rise in the Intellectual-Principle since before that there existed
 Real Being which is both one and numerous.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. It remains then to consider whether Being by its distinction
 produced Number or Number produced that distinction. It is certain
 that either Number was the cause of Being, movement, rest, identity
 and difference, or these the cause of Number.
 
 The first question is whether Number can exist in and of 
 itself or
 is dependent upon things- Two being something observed in two
 things, Three in three; and so of the arithmetical One, for if this
 could exist apart from numbered objects it could exist also 
 before the
 divisions of Being.
 
 But could it precede Being itself?
 
 For the present we must take it that Being precedes 
 Number, is its
 source. But if One means one being and the duality two beings, then
 unity precedes Being, and Number precedes the Beings.
 
 Mentally, to our approach? Yes: and in reality of existence as
 well.
 
 Let us consider: When we think of the existence and the fine
 appearance of a man as forming one thing, that unity is certainly
 thought of as subsequent to a precedent duality; when we 
 group a horse
 with a dog, the duality is obviously the subsequent. But 
 think of that
 which brings man or horse or dog into being or produces them, with
 full intention, from where they lie latent within itself: 
 the producer
 must say "I begin with a first, I pass on to a second; that 
 makes two;
 counting myself there are three." Of course there was no such
 numbering even of Beings for their production, since the due number
 was known from the very beginning; but this consideration serves to
 show that all Number precedes the very Beings themselves.
 
 But if Number thus preceded the Beings, then it is not included
 among them?
 
 The truth is that it existed within the Authentic Being 
 but not as
 applying to it, for Being was still unparted; the potentiality of
 Number existed and so produced the division within Being, put in
 travail with multiplicity; Number must be either the substance of
 Being or its Activity; the Life-Form as such and the
 Intellectual-Principle must be Number. Clearly Being is to 
 be, thought
 of as Number Collective, while the Beings are Number unfolded: the
 Intellectual-Principle is Number moving within itself, while the
 Living-Form is Number container of the universe. Even Being is the
 outcome of the Unity, and, since the prior is unity, the secondary
 must be Number.
 
 Hence it is that the Forms have been described as Henads and
 Numbers. This is the authentic Number; the other, the 
 "monadic" is its
 image. The Authentic is that made manifest in the Forms and 
 helping to
 bring them to be; primally it is the Number in the Authentic Being,
 inherent to it and preceding the Beings, serving to them as root,
 fount, first principle.
 
 For the Unity is source to Being; Being's Being is 
 stayed upon the
 Unity as its safeguard from dissolution; the Unity cannot rest upon
 Being which at that would be a unity before possessing unity; and so
 with the decad before possessing decadhood.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. When it takes lot with multiplicity, Being becomes Number by
 the fact of awakening to manifoldness;- before, it was a
 preparation, so to speak, of the Beings, their fore-promise, a total
 of henads offering a stay for what was to be based upon them.
 
 Here with us a man will say "I wish I had such and such 
 a quantity
 of gold"- or "such and such a number of houses." Gold is one thing:
 the wish is not to bring the numerical quantity into gold 
 but to bring
 the gold to quantity; the quantity, already present in the 
 mind, is to
 be passed on to the gold so that it acquire that numerical value.
 
 If the Beings preceded the number and this were discerned upon
 them at the stirring, to such and such a total, of the numbering
 principle, then the actual number of the Beings would be a chance
 not a choice; since that total is not a matter of chance, Number is
 a causing principle preceding that determined total.
 
 Number then pre-exists and is the cause by which produced things
 participate in quantity.
 
 The single thing derives its unity by participation in
 Unity-Absolute; its being it derives from Being-Absolute, which
 holds its Being from itself alone; a unity is a unity in virtue of
 Being; the particular unity- where the unity is a multiple unity- is
 one thing only as the Triad is; the collective Being is a unity of
 this kind, the unity not of the monad but of the myriad or any such
 collective number.
 
 Take a man affirming the presence of ten thousand 
 things; it is he
 that produces the number; he does not tell us that the ten thousand
 have uttered it; they merely exhibit their several forms; the
 enumerator's mind supplies the total which would never be 
 known if the
 mind kept still.
 
 How does the mind pronounce?
 
 By being able to enumerate; that is by knowing Number: but in
 order to this, Number must be in existence, and that that Principle
 should not know its own total content is absurd, impossible.
 
 It is with Number as with Good. When we pronounce things to be
 good either we mean that they are in their own nature so or we
 affirm goodness as an accidental in them. Dealing with the primals,
 the goodness we have in mind is that First Hypostasis; where the
 goodness is an accidental we imply the existence of a Principle of
 Good as a necessary condition of the accidental presence; there must
 be some source of that good which is observed elsewhere, whether
 this source be an Absolute Good or something that of its own nature
 produces the good. Similarly with number; in attributing the decad to
 things we affirm either the truly existent decad or, where the
 decadhood is accidental, we necessarily posit the self-subsistent
 decad, decad not associated; if things are to be described as
 forming a decad, then either they must be of themselves the decad or
 be preceded by that which has no other being than that of decadhood.
 
 It must be urged as a general truth that anything affirmed of a
 subject not itself either found its way in from outside or is the
 characteristic Act of that subject; and supposing the predicated
 attribute to show no variation of presence and absence but to be
 always present, then, if the subject is a Real Being so also is the
 accidental in an equal degree; or, failing Real Being, it at least
 belongs to the existents, it exists. In the case when the subject
 can be thought of as remaining without its Act, yet that Act is
 inbound with it even though to our minds it appears as a later; when
 on the contrary the subject cannot be conceived without the
 attribute-man, for example, without unity- then the attribute is
 either not later but concomitant or, being essential to the 
 existence,
 is precedent. In our view, Unity and Number are precedent.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. It may be suggested that the decad is nothing more than so
 many henads; admitting the one henad why should we reject the ten?
 As the one is a real existence why not the rest? We are certainly
 not compelled to attach that one henad to some one thing and so
 deprive all the rest of the means to unity: since every existent
 must be one thing, the unity is obviously common to all. This means
 one principle applying to many, the principle whose existence within
 itself we affirmed to be presupposed by its manifestation outside.
 
 But if a henad exists in some given object and further 
 is observed
 in something else, then that first henad being real, there cannot be
 only one henad in existence; there must be a multiplicity of henads.
 
 Supposing that first henad alone to exist, it must obviously be
 lodged either in the thing of completest Being or at all 
 events in the
 thing most completely a unity. If in the thing of completest Being,
 then the other henads are but nominal and cannot be ranked with the
 first henad, or else Number becomes a collection of unlike monads
 and there are differences among monads [an impossibility]. If that
 first henad is to be taken as lodged in the thing of 
 completest unity,
 there is the question why that most perfect unity should require the
 first henad to give it unity.
 
 Since all this is impossible, then, before any particular can be
 thought of as a unit, there must exist a unity bare, 
 unrelated by very
 essence. If in that realm also there must be a unity apart from
 anything that can be called one thing, why should there not exist
 another unity as well?
 
 Each particular, considered in itself, would be a manifold of
 monads, totalling to a collective unity. If however Nature produces
 continuously- or rather has produced once for all- not halting at
 the first production but bringing a sort of continuous unity into
 being, then it produces the minor numbers by the sheer fact 
 of setting
 an early limit to its advance: outgoing to a greater extent- not in
 the sense of moving from point to point but in its inner changes- it
 would produce the larger numbers; to each number so emerging it
 would attach the due quantities and the appropriate thing, knowing
 that without this adaptation to Number the thing could not exist or
 would be a stray, something outside, at once, of both Number and
 Reason.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. We may be told that unity and monad have no real existence,
 that the only unity is some definite object that is one 
 thing, so that
 all comes to an attitude of the mind towards things 
 considered singly.
 
 But, to begin with, why at this should not the affirmation of
 Being pass equally as an attitude of mind so that Being too must
 disappear? No doubt Being strikes and stings and gives the
 impression of reality; but we find ourselves just as vividly struck
 and impressed in the presence of unity. Besides, is this attitude,
 this concept itself, a unity or a manifold? When we deny the unity
 of an object, clearly the unity mentioned is not supplied by the
 object, since we are saying it has none; the unity therefore 
 is within
 ourselves, something latent in our minds independently of 
 any concrete
 one thing.
 
 [An objector speaks-] "But the unity we thus possess comes by
 our acceptance of a certain idea or impression from things external;
 it is a notion derived from an object. Those that take the notion of
 numbers and of unity to be but one species of the notions held to be
 inherent in the mind must allow to numbers and to unity the reality
 they ascribe to any of the others, and upon occasion they 
 must be met;
 but no such real existence can be posited when the concept 
 is taken to
 be an attitude or notion rising in us as a by-product of the
 objects; this happens when we say "This," "What," and still more
 obviously in the affirmations "Crowd," "Festival," "Army,"
 "Multiplicity." As multiplicity is nothing apart from certain
 constituent items and the festival nothing apart from the people
 gathered happily at the rites, so when we affirm unity we are not
 thinking of some Oneness self-standing, unrelated. And there are
 many other such cases; for instance "on the right," "Above" and
 their opposites; what is there of reality about this
 "On-the-right-ness" but the fact that two different positions are
 occupied? So with "Above": "Above" and "Below" are a mere matter of
 position and have no significance outside of this sphere.
 
 Now in answer to this series of objections our first remark is
 that there does exist an actuality implicit in each one of the
 relations cited; though this is not the same for all or the same for
 correlatives or the same for every reference to unity.
 
 But these objections must be taken singly.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. It cannot reasonably be thought that the notion of unity is
 derived from the object since this is physical- man, animal, even
 stone, a presentation of that order is something very different from
 unity [which must be a thing of the Intellectual]; if that
 presentation were unity, the mind could never affirm unity unless of
 that given thing, man, for example.
 
 Then again, just as in the case of "On the right" or other such
 affirmation of relation, the mind does not affirm in some caprice
 but from observation of contrasted position, so here it affirms
 unity in virtue of perceiving something real; assuredly the
 assertion of unity is not a bare attitude towards something
 non-existent. It is not enough that a thing be alone and be 
 itself and
 not something else: and that very "something else" tells of another
 unity. Besides Otherness and Difference are later; unless 
 the mind has
 first rested upon unity it cannot affirm Otherness or 
 Difference; when
 it affirms Aloneness it affirms unity-with-aloneness; thus unity is
 presupposed in Aloneness.
 
 Besides, that in us which asserts unity of some object is first
 a unity, itself; and the object is a unity before any outside
 affirmation or conception.
 
 A thing must be either one thing or more than one, manifold: and
 if there is to be a manifold there must be a precedent unity. To
 talk of a manifold is to talk of what has something added to 
 unity; to
 think of an army is to think of a multitude under arms and brought
 to unity. In refusing to allow the manifold to remain manifold, the
 mind makes the truth clear; it draws a separate many into one,
 either supplying a unity not present or keen to perceive the unity
 brought about by the ordering of the parts; in an army, even, the
 unity is not a fiction but as real as that of a building erected
 from many stones, though of course the unity of the house is more
 compact.
 
 If, then, unity is more pronounced in the continuous, and more
 again where there is no separation by part, this is clearly because
 there exists, in real existence, something which is a Nature or
 Principle of Unity. There cannot be a greater and less in the
 non-existent: as we predicate Substance of everything in sense, but
 predicate it also of the Intellectual order and more strictly there-
 since we hold that the greater and more sovereign substantiality
 belongs to the Real Beings and that Being is more marked in 
 Substance,
 even sensible Substance, than in the other Kinds- so, 
 finding unity to
 exhibit degree of more and less, differing in sense-things as well
 as in the Intellectual, we must similarly admit that Unity exists
 under all forms though still by reference, only, to that 
 primal Unity.
 
 As Substance and Real Being, despite the participation of the
 sensible, are still of the Intellectual and not the sensible 
 order, so
 too the unity observed present in things of sense by participation
 remains still an Intellectual and to be grasped by an Intellectual
 Act. The mind, from a thing present to it, comes to knowledge of
 something else, a thing not presented; that is, it has a prior
 knowledge. By this prior knowledge it recognises Being in a 
 particular
 being; similarly when a thing is one it can affirm unity as it can
 affirm also duality and multiplicity.
 
 It is impossible to name or conceive anything not making one or
 two or some number; equally impossible that the thing should 
 not exist
 without which nothing can possibly be named or conceived; impossible
 to deny the reality of that whose existence is a necessary condition
 of naming or affirming anything; what is a first need, 
 universally, to
 the formation of every concept and every proposition must 
 exist before
 reasoning and thinking; only as an existent can it be cited 
 to account
 for the stirring of thought. If Unity is necessary to the
 substantial existence of all that really is- and nothing exists
 which is not one- Unity must precede Reality and be its author. It
 is therefore, an existent Unity, not an existent that develops
 Unity; considered as Being-with-Unity it would be a manifold,
 whereas in the pure Unity there is no Being save in so far as Unity
 attends to producing it. As regards the word "This," it is nat a
 bare word; it affirms an indicated existence without using the name,
 it tells of a certain presence, whether a substance or some other
 existent; any This must be significant; it is no attitude of the
 mind applying itself to a non-existent; the This shows a thing
 present, as much as if we used the strict name of the object.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. To the argument touching relation we have an answer surely
 legitimate:
 
 The Unity is not of a nature to lose its own manner of being
 only because something else stands in a state which it does 
 not itself
 share; to stray from its unity it must itself suffer division into
 duality or the still wider plurality.
 
 If by division the one identical mass can become a 
 duality without
 loss of quantity, clearly the unity it possessed and by this
 destructive division lost was something distinct. What may be
 alternatively present and absent to the same subject must be classed
 among Real-Beings, regardless of position; an accidental 
 elsewhere, it
 must have reality in itself whether it be manifested in things of
 sense or in the Intellectual- an accidental in the Laters but
 self-existent in the higher, especially in the First in its aspect
 of Unity developing into Being. We may be told that Unity may lose
 that character without change in itself, becoming duality by
 association with something else; but this is not true; unity does
 not become two things; neither the added nor what takes the addition
 becomes two; each remains the one thing it was; the duality is
 predicable of the group only, the unity remaining unchanged 
 in each of
 those unchanged constituents.
 
 Two and the Dyad are not essentially relative: if the only
 condition to the construction of duality were meeting and
 association such a relation might perhaps constitute Twoness and
 Duality; but in fact we see Duality produced by the very opposite
 process, by the splitting apart of a unity. This shows that duality-
 or any other such numerical form- is no relation produced either by
 scission or association. If one configuration produces a certain
 thing it is impossible that the opposite should produce the same so
 that the thing may be identified with the relation.
 
 What then is the actual cause?
 
 Unity is due to the presence of Unity; duality to that 
 of Duality;
 it is precisely as things are white by Whiteness, just by Justice,
 beautiful by Beauty. Otherwise we must reject these universals and
 call in relation here also: justice would arise from a certain
 attitude in a given situation, Beauty from a certain pattern of the
 person with nothing present able to produce the beauty, 
 nothing coming
 from without to effect that agreeable appearance.
 
 You see something which you pronounce to be a unity; that thing
 possesses also size, form, and a host of other characteristics you
 might name; size, bulk, sweetness, bitterness and other Ideas are
 actually present in the thing; it surely cannot be thought 
 that, while
 every conceivable quality has Real-Being, quantity [Number] has not
 and that while continuous quantity exists, discrete quantity does
 not and this though continuous quantity is measured by the discrete.
 No: as size by the presence of Magnitude, and Oneness by the
 presence of Unity, so with Duality and all the other numerical modes.
 
 As to the How of participation, the enquiry is that of all
 participation in Ideal Forms; we must note, however, that 
 the presence
 of the Decad in the looser totals is different from its presence in
 the continuous; there is difference again in its presence within
 many powers where multiplicity is concentred in unity; arrived at
 the Intellectuals, there too we discover Number, the 
 Authentic Number,
 no longer entering the alien, Decad-Absolute not Decad of some
 particular Intellectual group.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. We must repeat: The Collective Being, the Authentic, 
 There, is
 at once Being and Intellectual-Principle and the Complete 
 Living Form;
 thus it includes the total of living things; the Unity There is
 reproduced by the unity of this living universe in the 
 degree possible
 to it- for the sense-nature as such cannot compass that 
 transcendental
 unity- thus that Living-All is inevitably Number-Entire: if 
 the Number
 were not complete, the All would be deficient to the extent of some
 number, and if every number applicable to living things were not
 contained in it, it would not be the all-comprehending Life-Form.
 Therefore, Number exists before every living thing, before the
 collective Life-Form.
 
 Again: Man exists in the Intellectual and with him all other
 living things, both by possession of Real-Being and because that is
 the Life-Form Complete. Even the man of this sphere is a 
 member of the
 Intellectual since that is the Life-Form Complete; every living
 thing by virtue of having life, is There, There in the Life-form,
 and man is There also, in the Intellectual, in so far as he is
 intellect, for all intelligences are severally members of That. Now
 all this means Number There. Yet even in Intellect Number is not
 present primally; its presence There is the reckoning of the Acts of
 Intellectual-Principle; it tallies with the justice in
 Intellectual-Principle, its moral wisdom, its virtues, its
 knowledge, all whose possession makes That Principle what it is.
 
 But knowledge- must not this imply presence to the alien? No;
 knowledge, known and knower are an identity; so with all the rest;
 every member of Intellectual-Principle is therefore present to it
 primally; justice, for example, is not accidental to it as to soul
 in its character as soul, where these virtues are mainly potential
 becoming actual by the intention towards Intellectual-Principle and
 association with it.
 
 Next we come to Being, fully realized, and this is the seat of
 Number; by Number, Being brings forth the Beings; its movement is
 planned to Number; it establishes the numbers of its offspring
 before bringing them to be, in the same way as it establishes its
 own unity by linking pure Being to the First: the numbers do not
 link the lower to the First; it suffices that Being is so linked;
 for Being, in taking form as Number, binds its members to 
 itself. As a
 unity, it suffers no division, remaining self-constant; as a thing
 of division, containing its chosen total of members, it knows that
 total and so brings forth Number, a phase therefore of its content:
 its development of part is ruled by the powers of Number, and the
 Beings it produces sum to that Number. Thus Number, the primal and
 true, is Principle and source of actuality to the Beings.
 
 Hence it is that in our sphere, also, Number accompanies the
 coming to be of particular things and to suppose another number than
 the actual is to suppose the production of something else or of
 nothing.
 
 These then are the primal numbers; they are numerable; 
 the numbers
 of the other order are of a double character; as derived from the
 first numbers they are themselves numerable but as acting for those
 first they are measures of the rest of things, numbering numbers and
 numerables. For how could they declare a Decad save in the light of
 numbers within themselves?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. But here we may be questioned about these numbers which we
 describe as the primal and authentic:
 
 "Where do you place these numbers, in what genus among Beings?
 To everyone they seem to come under Quantity and you have certainly
 brought Quantity in, where you say that discrete Quantity 
 equally with
 the continuous holds place among Beings; but you go on to say that
 there are the numbers belonging to the Firsts and then talk of other
 numbers quite distinct, those of reckoning; tell us how you arrange
 all this, for there is difficulty here. And then, the unity in
 sense-things- is that a quantity or is quantity here just so many
 units brought together, the unity being the starting-point 
 of quantity
 but not quantity itself? And, if the starting-point, is it a kindred
 thing or of another genus? All this you owe it to us to make clear."
 
 Be it so; we begin by pointing out a distinction:
 
 You take one thing with another- for we must first deal with
 objects of sense- a dog and a man, or two men; or you take a 
 group and
 affirm ten, a decad of men: in this case the number affirmed is not a
 Reality, even as Reality goes in the sphere of sense, but is purely
 Quantity: similarly when you resolve into units, breaking up the
 decad, those units are your principle of Quantity since the single
 individual is not a unity absolute.
 
 But the case is different when you consider one man in 
 himself and
 affirm a certain number, duality, for example, in that he is at once
 living and reasoning.
 
 By this analysis and totalling, you get quantity; but there are
 two objects under consideration and each of these is one; each of
 the unities contributes to the complete being and the oneness is
 inherent in each; this is another kind of number; number essential;
 even the duality so formed is no posterior; it does not signify a
 quantity apart from the thing but the quantity in the essence which
 holds the thing together. The number here is no mere result of your
 detailing; the things exist of themselves and are not 
 brought together
 by your reckoning, but what has it to do with essential reality that
 you count one man in with another? There is here no resultant unity
 such as that of a choir- the decad is real only to you who count
 the ten; in the ten of your reckoning there cannot be a decad without
 a unitary basis; it is you that make the ten by your counting, by
 fixing that tenness down to quantity; in choir and army there is
 something more than that, something not of your placing.
 
 But how do you come to have a number to place?
 
 The Number inherent apart from any enumeration has its own
 manner of being, but the other, that resulting upon the appearance
 of an external to be appraised by the Number within yourself, is
 either an Act of these inherent numbers or an Act in accordance with
 them; in counting we produce number and so bring quantity into being
 just as in walking we bring a certain movement into being.
 
 But what of that "Number within us having its own manner of
 being"?
 
 It is the Number of our essence. "Our essence" we read "partakes
 of Number and harmony and, also, is Number and harmony." 
 "Neither body
 nor magnitude," someone says: soul, then, is Number since it is
 essence. The number belonging to body is an essence of the order of
 body; the number belonging to soul constitutes the essences of souls.
 
 In the Intellectuals, all, if the Absolute Living-Form, 
 there is a
 multiple- a triad, let us say- that Triad of the Living-Form 
 is of the
 nature of essence: and the Triad prior to any living thing, Triad in
 the realm of Being, is a principle of essence.
 
 When you enumerate two things- say, animal and beauty- each of
 these remains one thing; the number is your production; it lay
 within yourself; it is you that elaborate quantity, here the 
 dyad. But
 when you declare virtue to be a Tetrad, you are affirming a Tetrad
 which does actually exist; the parts, so to speak, make one 
 thing; you
 are taking as the object of your act a Unity- Tetrad to which you
 accommodate the Tetrad within yourself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. But what of the Infinite Number we hear of; does not all
 this reasoning set it under limit?
 
 And rightly so if the thing is to be a number; limitlessness and
 number are in contradiction.
 
 How, then, do we come to use the term? Is it that we think of
 Number as we think of an infinite line, not with the idea that any
 such lire exists but that even the very greatest- that of 
 the [path of
 the] universe, for example- may be thought of as still greater? So
 it might be with number; let it be fixed, yet we still are free to
 think of its double, though not of course to produce the doubled
 quantity since it is impossible to join to the actual what is no
 more than a conception, a phantasm, private to ourselves.
 
 It is our view that there does exist an infinite line, among the
 Intellectual Beings: for There a line would not be quantitative and
 being without quantity could be numerically infinite. This however
 would be in another mode than that of limitless extension. In what
 mode then? In that the conception of the Absolute Line does not
 include the conception of limit.
 
 But what sort of thing is the Line in the Intellectual and what
 place does it hold?
 
 It is later than Number since unity is observed in it; 
 it rises at
 one point and traverses one course and simply lacks the quantity
 that would be the measure of the distance.
 
 But where does this thing lie? Is it existent only in 
 the defining
 thought, so to speak?
 
 No; it is also a thing, though a thing of the Intellectual. All
 that belongs to that order is at once an Intellectual and in some
 degree the concrete thing. There is a position, as well as a 
 manner of
 being, for all configurations, for surface, for solid. And certainly
 the configurations are not of our devising; for example, the
 configurations of the universe are obviously antecedent to
 ourselves; so it must be with all the configurations of the things
 of nature; before the bodily reproductions all must exist There,
 without configuration, primal configurations. For these primals are
 not shapes in something; self-belonging, they are perfect without
 extension; only the extended needs the external. In the sphere of
 Real-Being the configuration is always a unity; it becomes discrete
 either in the Living-Form or immediately before: I say "becomes
 discrete" not in the sense that it takes magnitude There but that it
 is broken apart for the purpose of the Living-Form and is allotted
 to the bodies within that Form- for instance, to Fire There, the
 Intellectual Pyramid. And because the Ideal-Form is There, 
 the fire of
 this sphere seeks to produce that configuration against the check of
 Matter: and so of all the rest as we read in the account of the
 realm of sense.
 
 But does the Life-Form contain the configurations by the 
 mere fact
 of its life?
 
 They are in the Intellectual-Principle previously but they also
 exist in the Living-Form; if this be considered as including the
 Intellectual-Principle, then they are primally in the Life-Form, but
 if that Principle comes first then they are previously in 
 that. And if
 the Life-Form entire contains also souls, it must certainly be
 subsequent to the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 No doubt there is the passage "Whatever Intellect sees in the
 entire Life-Form"; thus seeing, must not the 
 Intellectual-Principle be
 the later?
 
 No; the seeing may imply merely that the reality comes into being
 by the fact of that seeing; the Intellectual-Principle is 
 not external
 to the Life-Form; all is one; the Act of the Intellectual-Principle
 possesses itself of bare sphere, while the Life-Form holds the
 sphere as sphere of a living total.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. It appears then that Number in that realm is definite; it is
 we that can conceive the "More than is present"; the infinity lies
 in our counting: in the Real is no conceiving more than has been
 conceived; all stands entire; no number has been or could be omitted
 to make addition possible. It might be described as infinite in the
 sense that it has not been measured- who is there to measure it?-
 but it is solely its own, a concentrated unit, entire, not ringed
 round by any boundary; its manner of being is settled for it 
 by itself
 alone. None of the Real-Beings is under limit; what is limited,
 measured, is what needs measure to prevent it running away into the
 unbounded. There every being is Measure; and therefore it is that
 all is beautiful. Because that is a living thing it is beautiful,
 holding the highest life, the complete, a life not tainted towards
 death, nothing mortal there, nothing dying. Nor is the life of that
 Absolute Living-Form some feeble flickering; it is primal, the
 brightest, holding all that life has of radiance; it is that first
 light which the souls There draw upon for their life and bring with
 them when they come here. It knows for what purpose it lives,
 towards What it lives, from Whence it lives; for the Whence of its
 life is the Whither... and close above it stands the wisdom of all,
 the collective Intellectual-Principle, knit into it, one with it,
 colouring it to a higher goodness, by kneading wisdom into it,
 making its beauty still more august. Even here the august and
 veritably beautiful life is the life in wisdom, here dimly 
 seen, There
 purely. For There wisdom gives sight to the seer and power for the
 fuller living and in that tenser life both to see and to become what
 is seen.
 
 Here attention is set for the most part upon the unliving and,
 in the living, upon what is lifeless in them; the inner life is
 taken only with alloy: There, all are Living Beings, living wholly,
 unalloyed; however you may choose to study one of them apart from
 its life, in a moment that life is flashed out upon you: 
 once you have
 known the Essence that pervades them, conferring that unchangeable
 life upon them, once you perceive the judgement and wisdom and
 knowledge that are theirs, you can but smile at all the lower nature
 with its pretention to Reality.
 
 In virtue of this Essence it is that life endures, that the
 Intellectual-Principle endures, that the Beings stand in their
 eternity; nothing alters it, turns it, moves it; nothing, indeed, is
 in being besides it to touch it; anything that is must be 
 its product;
 anything opposed to it could not affect it. Being itself could not
 make such an opposite into Being; that would require a prior to both
 and that prior would then be Being; so that Parmenides was right
 when he taught the identity of Being and Unity. Being is thus beyond
 contact not because it stands alone but because it is Being. 
 For Being
 alone has Being in its own right.
 
 How then can we deny to it either Being or anything at all that
 may exist effectively, anything that may derive from it?
 
 As long as it exists it produces: but it exists for ever; so,
 therefore, do its products. And so great is it in power and beauty
 that it remains the allurer, all things of the universe 
 depending from
 it and rejoicing to hold their trace of it and through that to seek
 their good. To us, existence is before the good; all this world
 desires life and wisdom in order to Being; every soul and every
 intellect seeks to be its Being, but Being is sufficient to itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 SEVENTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 HOW THE MULTIPLICITY OF THE IDEAL-FORMS CAME INTO BEING:
 
 AND UPON THE GOOD.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. God, or some one of the gods, in sending the souls to their
 birth, placed eyes in the face to catch the light and 
 allotted to each
 sense the appropriate organ, providing thus for the safety 
 which comes
 by seeing and hearing in time and, seeking or avoiding under
 guidance of touch.
 
 But what led to this provision?
 
 It cannot be that other forms of being were produced first and
 that, these perishing in the absence of the senses, the maker at
 last supplied the means by which men and other living beings might
 avert disaster.
 
 We may be told that it lay within the divine knowledge 
 that animal
 life would be exposed to heat and cold and other such experiences
 incident to body and that in this knowledge he provided the 
 senses and
 the organs apt to their activity in order that the living total
 might not fall an easy prey.
 
 Now, either he gave these organs to souls already possessing the
 sensitive powers or he gave senses and organs alike.
 
 But if the souls were given the powers as well as the organs,
 then, souls though they were, they had no sensation before that
 giving. If they possessed these powers from the moment of being
 souls and became souls in order to their entry into process, then it
 is of their very nature to belong to process, unnatural to them to
 be outside of process and within the Intellectual: they were made in
 the intent that they should belong to the alien and have their being
 amid evil; the divine provision would consist in holding 
 them to their
 disaster; this is God's reasoned purpose, this the plan entire.
 
 Now what is the foundation of reasoned plan?
 
 Precedent planning, it may be; but still we are forced back to
 some thing or things determining it. What would these be here?
 
 Either sense-perception or intellect. But sense-perception it
 cannot in this case be: intellect is left; yet, starting from
 intellect, the conclusion will be knowledge, not therefore the
 handling of the sensible; what begins with the intellectual and
 proceeds to the intellectual can certainly not end in dealings with
 the sensible. Providence, then, whether over living beings 
 or over any
 part of the universe was never the outcome of plan.
 
 There is in fact no planning There; we speak of reasoned purpose
 in the world of things only to convey that the universe is of the
 character which in the later order would point to a wise purposing;
 Providence implies that things are as, in the later order, a 
 competent
 foreplanning would produce them. Reasoning serves, in beings not of
 the order above that need, to supply for the higher power; foresight
 is necessary in the lack of power which could dispense with it; it
 labours towards some one occurrence in preference to another and it
 goes in a sort of dread of the unfitting; where only the fitting can
 occur, there is no foreseeing. So with planning; where one 
 only of two
 things can be, what place is there for plan? The alone and one and
 utterly simplex cannot involve a "this to avert that": if the "this"
 could not be, the "that" must; the serviceable thing appeared and at
 once approved itself so.
 
 But surely this is foreseeing, deliberating: are we not back at
 what was said at the beginning, that God did to this end 
 give both the
 senses and the powers, however perplexing that giving be?
 
 No: all turns on the necessary completeness of Act; we cannot
 think anything belonging to God to be other than a whole and all and
 therefore in anything of God's that all must be contained; God
 therefore must take in the future, present beforehand. 
 Certainly there
 is no later in the divine; what is There as present is future for
 elsewhere. If then the future is present, it must be present 
 as having
 been foreconceived for later coming to be; at that divine stage
 therefore it lacks nothing and therefore can never lack; all
 existed, eternally and in such a way that at the later stage any
 particular thing may be said to exist for this or that purpose; the
 All, in its extension and so to speak unfolding, is able to present
 succession while yet it is simultaneous; this is because it contains
 the cause of all as inherent to itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. Thus we have even here the means of knowing the nature of the
 Intellectual-Principle, though, seeing it more closely than anything
 else, we still see it at less than its worth. We know that it exists
 but its cause we do not see, or, if we do, we see that cause as
 something apart. We see a man- or an eye, if you like- but this is
 an image or part of an image; what is in that Principle is 
 at once Man
 and the reason of his being; for There man- or eye- must be, itself,
 an intellective thing and a cause of its being; it could not exist
 at all unless it were that cause, whereas here, everything partial
 is separate and so is the cause of each. In the Intellectual, all is
 at one so that the thing is identical with the cause.
 
 Even here the thing and its cause are often identical- an
 eclipse furnishes an example- what then is there to prevent other
 things too being identical with their cause and this cause being the
 essence of the thing? It must be so; and by this search after the
 cause the thing's essence is reached, for the essence of a thing is
 its cause. I am not here saying that the informing Idea is the cause
 of the thing- though this is true- but that the Idea itself, 
 unfolded,
 reveals the cause inherent in it.
 
 A thing of inactivity, even though alive, cannot include its own
 cause; but where could a Forming-Idea, a member of the
 Intellectual-Principle, turn in quest of its cause? We may 
 be answered
 "In the Intellectual-Principle"; but the two are not distinct; the
 Idea is the Intellectual-Principle; and if that Principle 
 must contain
 the Ideas complete, their cause must be contained in them. The
 Intellectual-Principle itself contains every cause of the things of
 its content; but these of its content are identically
 Intellectual-Principle, each of them Intellectual-Principle; none of
 them, thus, can lack its own cause; each springs into being carrying
 with it the reason of its being. No result of chance, each must rise
 complete with its cause; it is an integral and so includes the
 excellence bound up with the cause. This is how all participants in
 the Idea are put into possession of their cause.
 
 In our universe, a coherent total of multiplicity, the several
 items are linked each to the other, and by the fact that it is an
 all every cause is included in it: even in the particular thing the
 part is discernibly related to the whole, for the parts do not come
 into being separately and successively but are mutually cause and
 caused at one and the same moment. Much more in the higher realm
 must all the singles exist for the whole and each for itself: if
 then that world is the conjoint reality of all, of an all not
 chance-ruled and not sectional, the cause There must include the
 causes: every item must hold, in its very nature, the uncaused
 possession of its cause; uncaused, independent and standing 
 apart from
 cause, they must be self-contained, cause and all.
 
 Further, since nothing There is chance-sprung, and the
 multiplicity in each comprehends the entire content, then 
 the cause of
 every member can be named; the cause was present from the beginning,
 inherent, not a cause but a fact of the being; or, rather, cause and
 manner of being were one. What could an Idea have, as cause, over
 and above the Intellectual-Principle? It is a thought of that
 Principle and cannot, at that, be considered as anything but 
 a perfect
 product. If it is thus perfect we cannot speak of anything 
 in which it
 is lacking nor cite any reason for such lack. That thing must be
 present, and we can say why. The why is inherent, therefore, in the
 entity, that is to say in every thought and activity of the
 Intellectual-Principle. Take for example the Idea of Man; Man entire
 is found to contribute to it; he is in that Idea in all his fulness
 including everything that from the beginning belonged to Man. If Man
 were not complete There, so that there were something to be added to
 the Idea, that additional must belong to a derivative; but Man
 exists from eternity and must therefore be complete; the man born is
 the derivative.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. What then is there to prevent man having been the object of
 planning There?
 
 No: all stands in that likeness, nothing to be added or taken
 away; this planning and reasoning is based only on an assumption;
 things are taken to be in process and this suggests planning and
 reasoning; insist on the eternity of the process and 
 planning falls to
 the ground. There can be no planning over the eternal; that would
 imply forgetfulness of a first state; further, if the second state
 were better, things stood ill at first; if they stood well, so they
 must remain.
 
 Only in conjunction with their causes are things good; even in
 this sphere a thing is good in virtue of being complete; form means
 that the thing is complete, the Matter duly controlled; this control
 means that nothing has been left crude; but something is so left if
 anything belonging to the shape be missing-eye, or other 
 part. Thus to
 state cause is to state the thing complete. Why eyes or eyebrows?
 For completion: if you say "For preservation," you affirm an
 indwelling safeguard of the essence, something contributory to the
 being: the essence, then, preceded the safeguard and the cause was
 inbound with the essence; distinct, this cause is in its 
 nature a part
 of the essence.
 
 All parts, thus, exist in regard to each other: the essence is
 all-embracing, complete, entire; the excellency is inbound with the
 cause and embraced by it; the being, the essence, the cause, all are
 one.
 
 But, at this, sense-perception- even in its particular modes- is
 involved in the Idea by eternal necessity, in virtue of the
 completeness of the Idea; Intellectual-Principle, as all-inclusive,
 contains in itself all by which we are brought, later, to recognise
 this perfection in its nature; the cause, There, was one total,
 all-inclusive; thus Man in the Intellectual was not purely
 intellect, sense-perception being an addition made upon his 
 entry into
 birth: all this would seem to imply a tendance in that great 
 Principle
 towards the lower, towards this sphere.
 
 But how could that Principle have such perception, be aware of
 things of sense? Surely it is untenable on the one hand that
 sense-perception should exist There, from eternity, and on the other
 that only upon the debasement of the soul should there be
 sense-perception here and the accomplishment in this realm of the
 Act of what was always a power in that?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. To meet the difficulty we must make a close examination of
 the nature of Man in the Intellectual; perhaps, though, it is better
 to begin with the man of this plane lest we be reasoning to Man
 There from a misconception of Man here. There may even be some who
 deny the difference.
 
 We ask first whether man as here is a Reason-Principle different
 to that soul which produces him as here and gives him life and
 thought; or is he that very soul or, again, the [yet lower] 
 soul using
 the human body?
 
 Now if man is a reasonable living being and by "living being" is
 meant a conjoint of soul and body, the Reason-Principle of man is
 not identical with soul. But if the conjoint of soul and body is the
 reason-principle of man, how can man be an eternal reality, seeing
 that it is only when soul and body have come together that the
 Reason-Principle so constituted appears?
 
 The Reason-Principle will be the foreteller of the man to be,
 not the Man Absolute with which we are dealing but more like his
 definition, and not at that indicating his nature since what is
 indicated is not the Idea that is to enter Matter but only 
 that of the
 known thing, the conjoint. We have not yet found the Man we are
 seeking, the equivalent of the Reason-Principle.
 
 But- it may be said- the Reason-Principle of such beings must be
 some conjoint, one element in another.
 
 This does not define the principle of either. If we are to state
 with entire accuracy the Reason-Principles of the Forms in Matter
 and associated with Matter, we cannot pass over the generative
 Reason-Principle, in this case that of Man, especially since we hold
 that a complete definition must cover the essential manner of being.
 
 What, then, is this essential of Man? What is the indwelling,
 inseparable something which constitutes Man as here? Is the
 Reason-Principle itself a reasoning living being or merely a maker
 of that reasoning life-form? and what is it apart from that act of
 making?
 
 The living being corresponds to a reasoning life in the
 Reason-Principle; man therefore is a reasoning life: but there is no
 life without soul; either, then, the soul supplies the 
 reasoning life-
 and man therefore is not an essence but simply an activity of the
 soul- or the soul is the man.
 
 But if reasoning soul is the man, why does it not constitute man
 upon its entry into some other animal form?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. Man, thus, must be some Reason-Principle other than soul. But
 why should he not be some conjoint- a soul in a certain
 Reason-Principle- the Reason-Principle being, as it were, a definite
 activity which however could not exist without that which acts?
 
 This is the case with the Reason-Principles in seed which are
 neither soulless nor entirely soul. For these productive principles
 cannot be devoid of soul and there is nothing surprising in such
 essences being Reason-Principles.
 
 But these principles producing other forms than man, of 
 what phase
 of soul are they activities? Of the vegetal soul? Rather of 
 that which
 produces animal life, a brighter soul and therefore one more 
 intensely
 living.
 
 The soul of that order, the soul that has entered into Matter of
 that order, is man by having, apart from body, a certain
 disposition; within body it shapes all to its own fashion, producing
 another form of Man, man reduced to what body admits, just as an
 artist may make a reduced image of that again.
 
 It is soul, then, that holds the pattern and Reason-Principles
 of Man, the natural tendencies, the dispositions and powers- all
 feeble since this is not the Primal Man- and it contains also the
 Ideal-Forms of other senses, Forms which themselves are 
 senses, bright
 to all seeming but images, and dim in comparison with those of the
 earlier order.
 
 The higher Man, above this sphere, rises from the more godlike
 soul, a soul possessed of a nobler humanity and brighter
 perceptions. This must be the Man of Plato's definition ["Man is
 Soul"], where the addition "Soul as using body" marks the
 distinction between the soul which uses body directly and the soul,
 poised above, which touches body only through that intermediary.
 
 The Man of the realm of birth has sense-perception: the higher
 soul enters to bestow a brighter life, or rather does not so much
 enter as simply impart itself; for soul does not leave the
 Intellectual but, maintaining that contact, holds the lower life as
 pendant from it, blending with it by the natural link of
 Reason-Principle to Reason-Principle: and man, the dimmer, brightens
 under that illumination.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. But how can that higher soul have sense-perception?
 
 It is the perception of what falls under perception There,
 sensation in the mode of that realm: it is the source of the soul's
 perception of the sense-realm in its correspondence with the
 Intellectual. Man as sense-percipient becomes aware of that
 correspondence and accommodates the sense-realm to the lowest
 extremity of its counterpart There, proceeding from the fire
 Intellectual to the fire here which becomes perceptible by 
 its analogy
 with that of the higher sphere. If material things existed There,
 the soul would perceive them; Man in the Intellectual, Man as
 Intellectual soul, would be aware of the terrestrial. This is how
 the secondary Man, copy of Man in the Intellectual, contains the
 Reason-Principles in copy; and Man in the Intellectual-Principle
 contained the Man that existed before any man. The diviner shines
 out upon the secondary and the secondary upon the tertiary; and even
 the latest possesses them all- not in the sense of actually living
 by them all but as standing in under-parallel to them. Some of us
 act by this lowest; in another rank there is a double activity, a
 trace of the higher being included; in yet another there is 
 a blending
 of the third grade with the others: each is that Man by which he
 acts while each too contains all the grades, though in some sense
 not so. On the separation of the third life and third Man from the
 body, then if the second also departs- of course not losing hold on
 the Above- the two, as we are told, will occupy the same place. No
 doubt it seems strange that a soul which has been the 
 Reason-Principle
 of a man should come to occupy the body of an animal: but 
 the soul has
 always been all, and will at different times be this and that.
 
 Pure, not yet fallen to evil, the soul chooses man and 
 is man, for
 this is the higher, and it produces the higher. It produces also the
 still loftier beings, the Celestials [Daimons], who are of one Form
 with the soul that makes Man: higher still stands that Man more
 entirely of the Celestial rank, almost a god, reproducing God, a
 Celestial closely bound to God as a man is to Man. For that 
 Being into
 which man develops is not to be called a god; there remains the
 difference which distinguishes souls, all of the same race 
 though they
 be. This is taking "Celestial" ["Daimon"] in the sense of Plato.
 
 When a soul which in the human state has been thus attached
 chooses animal nature and descends to that, it is giving forth the
 Reason-Principle- necessarily in it- of that particular animal: this
 lower it contained and the activity has been to the lower.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. But if it is by becoming evil and inferior that the soul
 produces the animal nature, the making of ox or horse was not at the
 outset in its character; the reason-principle of the animal, and the
 animal itself, must lie outside of the natural plan?
 
 Inferior, yes; but outside of nature, no. The thing 
 There [Soul in
 the Intellectual] was in some sense horse and dog from the
 beginning; given the condition, it produces the higher kind; let the
 condition fail, then, since produce it must, it produces what it
 may: it is like a skillful craftsman competent to create all kinds
 of works of art but reduced to making what is ordered and what the
 aptitude of his material indicates.
 
 The power of the All-Soul, as Reason-Principle of the universe,
 may be considered as laying down a pattern before the effective
 separate powers go forth from it: this plan would be something like
 a tentative illumining of Matter; the elaborating soul would give
 minute articulation to these representations of itself; 
 every separate
 effective soul would become that towards which it tended, assuming
 that particular form as the choral dancer adapts himself to 
 the action
 set down for him.
 
 But this is to anticipate: our enquiry was How there can be
 sense-perception in man without the implication that the Divine
 addresses itself to the realm of process. We maintained, and proved,
 that the Divine does not look to this realm but that things here are
 dependent upon those and represent them and that man here, 
 holding his
 powers from Thence, is directed Thither, so that, while sense makes
 the environment of what is of sense in him, the Intellectual 
 in him is
 linked to the Intellectual.
 
 What we have called the perceptibles of that realm enter into
 cognisance in a way of their own, since they are not material, while
 the sensible sense here- so distinguished as dealing with corporeal
 objects- is fainter than the perception belonging to that higher
 world; the man of this sphere has sense-perception because 
 existing in
 a less true degree and taking only enfeebled images of things There-
 perceptions here are Intellections of the dimmer order, and the
 Intellections There are vivid perceptions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. So much for the thing of sense; but it would appear that the
 prototype There of the living form, the universal horse, must look
 deliberately towards this sphere; and, that being so, the idea of
 horse must have been worked out in order there be a horse here?
 
 Yet what was that there to present the idea of the horse it was
 desired to produce? Obviously the idea of horse must exist before
 there was any planning to make a horse; it could not be thought of
 in order to be made; there must have been horse unproduced 
 before that
 which was later to come into being. If, then, the thing 
 existed before
 it was produced- if it cannot have been thought of in order to its
 production- the Being that held the horse as There held it 
 in presence
 without any looking to this sphere; it was not with intent to set
 horse and the rest in being here that they were contained 
 There; it is
 that, the universal existing, the reproduction followed of necessity
 since the total of things was not to halt at the 
 Intellectual. Who was
 there to call a halt to a power capable at once of
 self-concentration and of outflow?
 
 But how come these animals of earth to be There? What 
 have they to
 do within God? Reasoning beings, all very well; but this host of the
 unreasoning, what is there august in them? Surely the very contrary?
 
 The answer is that obviously the unity of our universe must be
 that of a manifold since it is subsequent to that unity-absolute;
 otherwise it would be not next to that but the very same thing. As a
 next it could not hold the higher rank of being more perfectly a
 unity; it must fall short: since the best is a unity, 
 inevitably there
 must be something more than unity, for deficiency involves plurality.
 
 But why should it not be simply a dyad?
 
 Because neither of the constituents could ever be a pure unity,
 but at the very least a duality and so progressively [in an endless
 dualization]. Besides, in that first duality of the hypothesis there
 would be also movement and rest, Intellect and the life included in
 Intellect, all-embracing Intellect and life complete. That means
 that it could not be one Intellect; it must be Intellect agglomerate
 including all the particular intellects, a thing therefore 
 as multiple
 as all the Intellects and more so; and the life in it would nat be
 that of one soul but of all the souls with the further power of
 producing the single souls: it would be the entire living universe
 containing much besides man; for if it contained only man, man would
 be alone here.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. Admitted, then- it will be said- for the nobler forms of
 life; but how can the divine contain the mean, the unreasoning? The
 mean is the unreasoning, since value depends upon reason and 
 the worth
 of the intellective implies worthlessness where intellection is
 lacking. Yet how can there be question of the unreasoning or
 unintellective when all particulars exist in the divine and 
 come forth
 from it?
 
 In taking up the refutation of these objections, we must insist
 upon the consideration that neither man nor animals here can be
 thought of as identical with the counterparts in the higher realm;
 those ideal forms must be taken in a larger way. And again the
 reasoning thing is not of that realm: here the reasoning, There the
 pre-reasoning.
 
 Why then does man alone reason here, the others remaining
 reasonless?
 
 Degrees of reasoning here correspond to degrees of 
 Intellection in
 that other sphere, as between man and the other living beings There;
 and those others do in some measure act by understanding.
 
 But why are they not at man's level of reason: why also the
 difference from man to man?
 
 We must reflect that, since the many forms of lives are 
 movements-
 and so with the Intellections- they cannot be identical: 
 there must be
 different lives, distinct intellections, degrees of lightsomeness
 and clarity: there must be firsts, seconds, thirds, determined by
 nearness to the Firsts. This is how some of the Intellections are
 gods, others of a secondary order having what is here known 
 as reason,
 while others again belong to the so-called unreasoning: but what we
 know here as unreasoning was There a Reason-Principle; the
 unintelligent was an Intellect; the Thinker of Horse was 
 Intellect and
 the Thought, Horse, was an Intellect.
 
 But [it will be objected] if this were a matter of mere thinking
 we might well admit that the intellectual concept, remaining
 concept, should take in the unintellectual, but where concept is
 identical with thing how can the one be an Intellection and the
 other without intelligence? Would not this be Intellect making
 itself unintelligent?
 
 No: the thing is not unintelligent; it is Intelligence in a
 particular mode, corresponding to a particular aspect of Life; and
 just as life in whatever form it may appear remains always life, so
 Intellect is not annulled by appearing in a certain mode.
 Intellectual-Principle adapted to some particular living being does
 not cease to be the Intellectual-Principle of all, including 
 man: take
 it where you will, every manifestation is the whole, though in some
 special mode; the particular is produced but the possibility is of
 all. In the particular we see the Intellectual-Principle in
 realization; the realized is its latest phase; in one case the last
 aspect is "horse"; at "horse" ended the progressive outgoing towards
 the lesser forms of life, as in another case it will end at
 something lower still. The unfolding of the powers of this Principle
 is always attended by some abandonment in regard to the highest; the
 outgoing is by loss, and by this loss the powers become one thing or
 another according to the deficiency of the life-form produced by the
 failing principle; it is then that they find the means of adding
 various requisites; the safeguards of the life becoming inadequate
 there appear nail, talon, fang, horn. Thus the
 Intellectual-Principle by its very descent is directed towards the
 perfect sufficiency of the natural constitution, finding there
 within itself the remedy of the failure.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. But failure There? What can defensive horns serve to 
 There? To
 sufficiency as living form, to completeness. That principle must be
 complete as living form, complete as Intellect, complete as life, so
 that if it is not to be one thing it may be another. Its
 characteristic difference is in this power of being now this, now
 that, so that, summing all, it may be the completest life-form,
 Intelligence complete, life in greatest fulness with each of the
 particulars complete in its degree while yet, over all that
 multiplicity, unity reigns.
 
 If all were one identity, the total could not contain 
 this variety
 of forms; there would be nothing but a self-sufficing unity. Like
 every compound it must consist of things progressively differing in
 form and safeguarded in that form. This is in the very 
 nature of shape
 and Reason-Principle; a shape, that of man let us suppose, must
 include a certain number of differences of part but all 
 dominated by a
 unity; there will be the noble and the inferior, eye and finger, but
 all within a unity; the part will be inferior in comparison with the
 total but best in its place. The Reason-Principle, too, is 
 at once the
 living form and something else, something distinct from the being of
 that form. It is so with virtue also; it contains at once the
 universal and the particular; and the total is good because the
 universal is not differentiated.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. The very heavens, patently multiple, cannot be thought to
 disdain any form of life since this universe holds 
 everything. Now how
 do these things come to be here? Does the higher realm contain all
 of the lower?
 
 All that has been shaped by Reason-Principle and 
 conforms to Idea.
 
 But, having fire [warmth] and water, it will certainly have
 vegetation; how does vegetation exist There? Earth, too? either
 these are alive or they are There as dead things and then not
 everything There has life. How in sum can the things of this realm
 be also There?
 
 Vegetal life we can well admit, for the plant is a
 Reason-Principle established in life. If in the plant the
 Reason-Principle, entering Matter and constituting the plant, is a
 certain form of life, a definite soul, then, since every
 Reason-Principle is a unity, then either this of plant-life is the
 primal or before it there is a primal plant, source of its 
 being: that
 first plant would be a unity; those here, being multiple, must
 derive from a unity. This being so, that primal must have much the
 truer life and be the veritable plant, the plants here deriving from
 it in the secondary and tertiary degree and living by a 
 vestige of its
 life.
 
 But earth; how is there earth There: what is the being of earth
 and how are we to represent to ourselves the living earth of that
 realm?
 
 First, what is it, what the mode of its being?
 
 Earth, here and There alike, must possess shape and a
 Reason-Principle. Now in the case of the vegetal, the 
 Reason-Principle
 of the plant here was found to be living in that higher realm: is
 there such a Reason-Principle in our earth?
 
 Take the most earthy of things found shaped in earth and they
 exhibit, even they, the indwelling earth-principle. The growing and
 shaping of stones, the internal moulding of mountains as they rise,
 reveal the working of an ensouled Reason-Principle fashioning them
 from within and bringing them to that shape: this, we must 
 take it, is
 the creative earth-principle corresponding to what we call the
 specific principle of a tree; what we know as earth is like the wood
 of the tree; to cut out a stone is like lopping a twig from a tree,
 except of course that there is no hurt done, the stone remaining a
 member of the earth as the twig, uncut, of the tree.
 
 Realizing thus that the creative force inherent in our earth is
 life within a Reason-Principle, we are easily convinced that 
 the earth
 There is much more primally alive, that it is a reasoned
 Earth-Livingness, the earth of Real-Being, earth primally, the
 source of ours.
 
 Fire, similarly, with other such things, must be a
 Reason-Principle established in Matter: fire certainly does not
 originate in the friction to which it may be traced; the friction
 merely brings out a fire already existent in the scheme and
 contained in the materials rubbed together. Matter does not 
 in its own
 character possess this fire-power: the true cause is something
 informing the Matter, that is to say, a Reason-Principle, obviously
 therefore a soul having the power of bringing fire into being; that
 is, a life and a Reason-Principle in one.
 
 It is with this in mind that Plato says there is soul in
 everything of this sphere. That soul is the cause of the fire of the
 sense-world; the cause of fire here is a certain Life of fiery
 character, the more authentic fire. That transcendent fire being
 more truly fire will be more veritably alive; the fire absolute
 possesses life. And the same principles apply to the other elements,
 water and air.
 
 Why, then, are water and air not ensouled as earth is?
 
 Now, it is quite certain that these are equally within the
 living total, parts of the living all; life does not appear 
 visibly in
 them; but neither does it in the case of the earth where its
 presence is inferred by what earth produces: but there are living
 things in fire and still more manifestly in water and there are
 systems of life in the air. The particular fire, rising only to be
 quenched, eludes the soul animating the universe; it slips away from
 the magnitude which would manifest the soul within it; so 
 with air and
 water. If these Kinds could somehow be fastened down to 
 magnitude they
 would exhibit the soul within them, now concealed by the fact that
 their function requires them to be loose or flowing. It is much as
 in the case of the fluids within ourselves; the flesh and all that
 is formed out of the blood into flesh show the soul within, but the
 blood itself, not bringing us any sensation, seems not to have soul;
 yet it must; the blood is not subject to blind force; its nature
 obliges it to abstain from the soul which nonetheless is 
 indwelling in
 it. This must be the case with the three elements; it is the 
 fact that
 the living beings formed from the close conglomeration of air [the
 stars] are not susceptible to suffering. But just as air, so long as
 it remains itself, eludes the light which is and remains unyielding,
 so too, by the effect of its circular movement, it eludes soul- and,
 in another sense, does not. And so with fire and water.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. Or take it another way: Since in our view this 
 universe stands
 to that as copy to original, the living total must exist There
 beforehand; that is the realm of complete Being and everything must
 exist There.
 
 The sky There must be living and therefore not bare of 
 stars, here
 known as the heavens- for stars are included in the very meaning of
 the word. Earth too will be There, and not void but even more
 intensely living and containing all that lives and moves upon our
 earth and the plants obviously rooted in life; sea will be There and
 all waters with the movement of their unending life and all 
 the living
 things of the water; air too must be a member of that universe with
 the living things of air as here.
 
 The content of that living thing must surely be alive- as in
 this sphere- and all that lives must of necessity be There. 
 The nature
 of the major parts determines that of the living forms they
 comprise; by the being and content of the heaven There are
 determined all the heavenly forms of life; if those lesser forms
 were not There, that heaven itself would not be.
 
 To ask how those forms of life come to be There is simply asking
 how that heaven came to be; it is asking whence comes life, 
 whence the
 All-Life, whence the All-Soul, whence collective Intellect: and the
 answer is that There no indigence or impotence can exist but all
 must be teeming, seething, with life. All flows, so to 
 speak, from one
 fount not to be thought of as one breath or warmth but rather as one
 quality englobing and safeguarding all qualities- sweetness with
 fragrance, wine- quality and the savours of everything that may be
 tasted, all colours seen, everything known to touch, all that ear
 may hear, all melodies, every rhythm.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. For Intellectual-Principle is not a simplex, nor is the soul
 that proceeds from it: on the contrary things include variety in the
 degree of their simplicity, that is to say in so far as they are not
 compounds but Principles and Activities;- the activity of the lowest
 is simple in the sense of being a fading-out, that of the 
 First as the
 total of all activity. Intellectual-Principle is moved in a movement
 unfailingly true to one course, but its unity and identity are not
 those of the partial; they are those of its universality; and indeed
 the partial itself is not a unity but divides to infinity.
 
 We know that Intellectual-Principle has a source and advances to
 some term as its ultimate; now, is the intermediate between 
 source and
 term to thought of as a line or as some distinct kind of body
 uniform and unvaried?
 
 Where at that would be its worth? it had no change, if no
 differentiation woke it into life, it would not be a Force; that
 condition would in no way differ from mere absence of power and,
 even calling it movement, it would still be the movement of 
 a life not
 all-varied but indiscriminate; now it is of necessity that life be
 all-embracing, covering all the realms, and that nothing 
 fail of life.
 Intellectual-Principle, therefore, must move in every direction upon
 all, or more precisely must ever have so moved.
 
 A simplex moving retains its character; either there is 
 no change,
 movement has been null, or if there has been advance it still
 remains a simplex and at once there is a permanent duality: 
 if the one
 member of this duality is identical with the other, then it is still
 as it was, there has been no advance; if one member differs from the
 other, it has advanced with differentiation, and, out of a certain
 identity and difference, it has produced a third unity. This
 production, based on Identity and Difference, must be in its nature
 identical and different; it will be not some particular different
 thing but Collective Difference, as its Identity is Collective
 Identity.
 
 Being, thus, at once Collective Identity and Collective
 Difference, Intellectual-Principle must reach over all different
 things; its very nature then is to modify into a universe. If the
 realm of different things existed before it, these different things
 must have modified it from the beginning; if they did not, this
 Intellectual-Principle produced all, or, rather, was all.
 
 Beings could not exist save by the activity of
 Intellectual-Principle; wandering down every way it produces thing
 after thing, but wandering always within itself in such self-bound
 wandering as authentic Intellect may know; this wandering 
 permitted to
 its nature is among real beings which keep pace with its 
 movement; but
 it is always itself; this is a stationary wandering, a wandering
 within the Meadow of Truth from which it does not stray.
 
 It holds and covers the universe which it has made the space, so
 to speak, of its movement, itself being also that universe which is
 space to it. And this Meadow of Truth is varied so that movement
 through it may be possible; suppose it not always and everywhere
 varied, the failing of diversity is a failure of movement; failure
 in movement would mean a failing of the Intellectual Act; halting,
 it has ceased to exercise its Intellectual Act; this ceasing, it
 ceases to be.
 
 The Intellectual-Principle is the Intellectual Act; its movement
 is complete, filling Being complete; And the entire of Being is the
 Intellectual Act entire, comprehending all life and the unfailing
 succession of things. Because this Principle contains Identity and
 Difference its division is ceaselessly bringing the different things
 to light. Its entire movement is through life and among 
 living things.
 To a traveller over land, all is earth but earth abounding in
 difference: so in this journey the life through which
 Intellectual-Principle passes is one life but, in its ceaseless
 changing, a varied life.
 
 Throughout this endless variation it maintains the one course
 because it is not, itself, subject to change but on the contrary is
 present as identical and unvarying Being to the rest of 
 things. For if
 there be no such principle of unchanging identity to things, all is
 dead, activity and actuality exist nowhere. These "other things"
 through which it passes are also Intellectual-Principle itself;
 otherwise it is not the all-comprehending principle: if it is to be
 itself, it must be all-embracing; failing that, it is not itself. If
 it is complete in itself, complete because all-embracing, 
 and there is
 nothing which does not find place in this total, then there can be
 nothing belonging to it which is not different; only by 
 difference can
 there be such co-operation towards a total. If it knew no otherness
 but was pure identity its essential Being would be the less for that
 failure to fulfil the specific nature which its completion requires.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. On the nature of the Intellectual-Principle we get light
 from its manifestations; they show that it demands such diversity as
 is compatible with its being a monad. Take what principle you will,
 that of plant or animal: if this principle were a pure unity 
 and not a
 specifically varied thing, it could not so serve as principle; its
 product would be Matter, the principle not having taken all those
 forms necessary if Matter is to be permeated and utterly
 transformed. A face is not one mass; there are nose and eyes; and
 the nose is not a unity but has the differences which make it a
 nose; as bare unity it would be mere mass.
 
 There is infinity in Intellectual-Principle since, of its very
 nature, it is a multiple unity, not with the unity of a 
 house but with
 that of a Reason-Principle, multiple in itself: in the one
 Intellectual design it includes within itself, as it were in
 outline, all the outlines, all the patterns. All is within 
 it, all the
 powers and intellections; the division is not determined by 
 a boundary
 but goes ever inward; this content is held as the living universe
 holds the natural forms of the living creatures in it from the
 greatest to the least, down even to the minutest powers 
 where there is
 a halt at the individual form. The discrimination is not of items
 huddled within a sort of unity; this is what is known as the 
 Universal
 Sympathy, not of course the sympathy known here which is a copy and
 prevails amongst things in separation; that authentic Sympathy
 consists in all being a unity and never discriminate.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. That Life, the various, the all-including, the 
 primal and one,
 who can consider it without longing to be of it, disdaining all the
 other?
 
 All other life is darkness, petty and dim and poor; it is
 unclean and polluting the clean for if you do but look upon it you
 no longer see nor live this life which includes all living, in which
 there is nothing that does not live and live in a life of purity
 void of all that is ill. For evil is here where life is in copy and
 Intellect in copy; There is the archetype, that which is good in the
 very Idea- we read- as holding The Good in the pure Idea. That
 Archetype is good; Intellectual-Principle is good as holding its
 life by contemplation of the archetype; and it sees also as good the
 objects of its contemplation because it holds them in its act of
 contemplating the Principle of Good. But these objects come to it
 not as they are There but in accord with its own condition, for it
 is their source; they spring thence to be here, and
 Intellectual-Principle it is that has produced them by its vision
 There. In the very law, never, looking to That, could it fail of
 Intellectual Act; never, on the other hand, could it produce what is
 There; of itself it could not produce; Thence it must draw its power
 to bring forth, to teem with offspring of itself; from the Good it
 takes what itself did not possess. From that Unity came multiplicity
 to Intellectual-Principle; it could not sustain the power poured
 upon it and therefore broke it up; it turned that one power into
 variety so as to carry it piecemeal.
 
 All its production, effected in the power of The Good, contains
 goodness; it is good, itself, since it is constituted by these
 things of good; it is Good made diverse. It might be likened to a
 living sphere teeming with variety, to a globe of faces radiant with
 faces all living, to a unity of souls, all the pure souls, not
 faulty but the perfect, with Intellect enthroned over all so that
 the place entire glows with Intellectual splendour.
 
 But this would be to see it from without, one thing seeing
 another; the true way is to become Intellectual-Principle and be,
 our very selves, what we are to see.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. But even there we are not to remain always, in that beauty
 of the multiple; we must make haste yet higher, above this heaven of
 ours and even that; leaving all else aside we ask in awe 
 "Who produced
 that realm and how?" Everything There is a single Idea in an
 individual impression and, informed by The Good, possesses the
 universal good transcendent over all. Each possessing that Being
 above, possesses also the total Living-Form in virtue of that
 transcendent life, possesses, no doubt, much else as well.
 
 But what is the Nature of this Transcendent in view of which and
 by way of which the Ideas are good?
 
 The best way of putting the question is to ask whether, when
 Intellectual-Principle looked towards The Good, it had 
 Intellection of
 that unity as a multiplicity and, itself a unity, plied its Act by
 breaking into parts what it was too feeble to know as a whole.
 
 No: that would not be Intellection looking upon the 
 Good; it would
 be a looking void of Intellection. We must think of it not as
 looking but as living; dependent upon That, it kept itself turned
 Thither; all the tendance taking place There and upon That must be a
 movement teeming with life and must so fill the looking Principle;
 there is no longer bare Act, there is a filling to saturation.
 Forthwith Intellectual-Principle becomes all things, knows that fact
 in virtue of its self-knowing and at once becomes
 Intellectual-Principle, filled so as to hold within itself 
 that object
 of its vision, seeing all by the light from the Giver and bearing
 that Giver with it.
 
 In this way the Supreme may be understood to be the cause at
 once of essential reality and of the knowing of reality. The sun,
 cause of the existence of sense-things and of their being seen, is
 indirectly the cause of sight, without being either the 
 faculty or the
 object: similarly this Principle, The Good, cause of Being and
 Intellectual-Principle, is a light appropriate to what is to be seen
 There and to their seer; neither the Beings nor the
 Intellectual-Principle, it is their source and by the light it sheds
 upon both makes them objects of Intellection. This filling procures
 the existence; after the filling, the being; the existence achieved,
 the seeing followed: the beginning is that state of not yet having
 been filled, though there is, also, the beginning which 
 means that the
 Filling Principle was outside and by that act of filling 
 gave shape to
 the filled.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. But in what mode are these secondaries, and
 Intellectual-Principle itself, within the First? They are not in the
 Filling Principle; they are not in the filled since before 
 that moment
 it did not contain them.
 
 Giving need not comport possessing; in this order we are to
 think of a giver as a greater and of a gift as a lower; this is the
 meaning of origin among real Beings. First there must be an 
 actualized
 thing; its laters must be potentially their own priors; a first must
 transcend its derivatives; the giver transcends the given, as a
 superior. If therefore there is a prior to actuality, that prior
 transcends Activity and so transcends Life. Our sphere containing
 life, there is a Giver of Life, a principle of greater good, of
 greater worth than Life; this possessed Life and had no need to look
 for it to any giver in possession of Life's variety.
 
 But the Life was a vestige of that Primal not a life lived by
 it; Life, then, as it looked towards That was undetermined; having
 looked it had determination though That had none. Life looks to
 unity and is determined by it, taking bound, limit, form. But this
 form is in the shaped, the shaper had none; the limit was 
 not external
 as something drawn about a magnitude; the limit was that of the
 multiplicity of the Life There, limitless itself as radiated from
 its great Prior; the Life itself was not that of some determined
 being, or it would be no more than the life of an individual. Yet it
 is defined; it must then have been defined as the Life of a unity
 including multiplicity; certainly too each item of the 
 multiplicity is
 determined, determined as multiple by the multiplicity of Life but
 as a unity by the fact of limit.
 
 As what, then, is its unity determined?
 
 As Intellectual-Principle: determined Life is
 Intellectual-Principle. And the multiplicity?
 
 As the multiplicity of Intellectual-Principles: all its
 multiplicity resolves itself into Intellectual-Principles- on the
 one hand the collective Principle, on the other the particular
 Principles.
 
 But does this collective Intellectual-Principle include each of
 the particular Principles as identical with itself?
 
 No: it would be thus the container of only the one thing; since
 there are many Intellectual-Principles within the collective, there
 must be differentiation.
 
 Once more, how does the particular Intellect come to this
 differentiation?
 
 It takes its characteristic difference by becoming entirely a
 unity within the collective whose totality could not be 
 identical with
 any particular.
 
 Thus the Life in the Supreme was the collectivity of power; the
 vision taking place There was the potentiality of all;
 Intellectual-Principle, thus arising, is manifested as this universe
 of Being. It stands over the Beings not as itself requiring base but
 that it may serve as base to the Form of the Firsts, the Formless
 Form. And it takes position towards the soul, becoming a light to
 the soul as itself finds its light in the First; whenever
 Intellectual-Principle becomes the determinant of soul it shapes it
 into Reasoning Soul, by communicating a trace of what itself has
 come to possess.
 
 Thus Intellectual-Principle is a vestige of the Supreme; 
 but since
 the vestige is a Form going out into extension, into plurality, that
 Prior, as the source of Form, must be itself without shape and Form:
 if the Prior were a Form, the Intellectual-Principle itself could be
 only a Reason-Principle. It was necessary that The First be utterly
 without multiplicity, for otherwise it must be again referred to a
 prior.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. But in what way is the content of Intellectual-Principle
 participant in good? Is it because each member of it is an Idea or
 because of their beauty or how?
 
 Anything coming from The Good carries the image and type 
 belonging
 to that original or deriving from it, as anything going back 
 to warmth
 or sweetness carries the memory of those originals: Life entered
 into Intellectual-Principle from The Supreme, for its origin 
 is in the
 Activity streaming Thence; Intellectual-Principle springs from the
 Supreme, and with it the beauty of the Ideas; at once all 
 these, Life,
 Intellectual-Principle, Idea, must inevitably have goodness.
 
 But what is the common element in them? Derivation from the
 First is not enough to procure identical quality; there must be some
 element held in common by the things derived: one source may produce
 many differing things as also one outgoing thing may take difference
 in various recipients: what enters into the First Act is different
 from what that Act transmits and there is difference, again, in the
 effect here. Nonetheless every item may be good in a degree of its
 own. To what, then, is the highest degree due?
 
 But first we must ask whether Life is a good, bare Life, or only
 the Life streaming Thence, very different from the Life known here?
 Once more, then, what constitutes the goodness of Life?
 
 The Life of The Good, or rather not its Life but that given
 forth from it.
 
 But if in that higher Life there must be something from That,
 something which is the Authentic Life, we must admit that since
 nothing worthless can come Thence Life in itself is good; so too we
 must admit, in the case of Authentic Intellectual-Principle, that
 its Life because good derives from that First; thus it becomes clear
 that every Idea is good and informed by the Good. The Ideas must
 have something of good, whether as a common property or as a
 distinct attribution or as held in some distinct measure.
 
 Thus it is established that the particular Idea contains in its
 essence something of good and thereby becomes a good thing; for Life
 we found to be good not in the bare being but in its derivation from
 the Authentic, the Supreme whence it sprung: and the same is true of
 Intellectual-Principle: we are forced therefore admit a certain
 identity.
 
 When, with all their differences, things may be affirmed 
 to have a
 measure of identity, the matter of the identity may very well be
 established in their very essence and yet be mentally 
 abstracted; thus
 life in man or horse yields the notion of animal; from water or fire
 we may get that of warmth; the first case is a definition of 
 Kind, the
 other two cite qualities, primary and secondary respectively. Both
 or one part of Intellect, then, would be called by the one term good.
 
 Is The Good, then, inherent in the Ideas essentially? 
 Each of them
 is good but the goodness is not that of the Unity-Good. How, then,
 is it present?
 
 By the mode of parts.
 
 But The Good is without parts?
 
 No doubt The Good is a unity; but here it has become
 particularized. The First Activity is good and anything determined
 in accord with it is good as also is any resultant. There is the
 good that is good by origin in The First, the good that is in an
 ordered system derived from that earlier, and the good that is in
 the actualization [in the thing participant]. Derived, then, not
 identical- like the speech and walk and other characteristics of one
 man, each playing its due part.
 
 Here, it is obvious, goodness depends upon order, 
 rhythm, but what
 equivalent exists There?
 
 We might answer that in the case of the sense-order, 
 too, the good
 is imposed since the ordering is of things different from the
 Orderer but that There the very things are good.
 
 But why are they thus good in themselves? We cannot be content
 with the conviction of their goodness on the ground of their 
 origin in
 that realm: we do not deny that things deriving Thence are good, but
 our subject demands that we discover the mode by which they come to
 possess that goodness.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 19
 
 19. Are we to rest all on pursuit and on the soul? Is it 
 enough to
 put faith in the soul's choice and call that good which the soul
 pursues, never asking ourselves the motive of its choice? We marshal
 demonstration as to the nature of everything else; is the good to be
 dismissed as choice?
 
 Several absurdities would be entailed. The good becomes a mere
 attribute of things; objects of pursuit are many and 
 different so that
 mere choice gives no assurance that the thing chosen is the best; in
 fact, we cannot know the best until we know the good.
 
 Are we to determine the good by the respective values of things?
 
 This is to make Idea and Reason-Principle the test: all 
 very well;
 but arrived at these, what explanation have we to give as to why
 Idea and Reason-Principle themselves are good? In the lower, we
 recognise goodness- in its less perfect form- by comparison with
 what is poorer still; we are without a standard There where no evil
 exists, the Bests holding the field alone. Reason demands to 
 know what
 constitutes goodness; those principles are good in their own nature
 and we are left in perplexity because cause and fact are identical:
 and even though we should state a cause, the doubt still 
 remains until
 our reason claims its rights There. But we need not abandon the
 search; another path may lead to the light.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 20
 
 20. Since we are not entitled to make desire the test by which
 to decide on the nature and quality of the good, we may perhaps have
 recourse to judgement.
 
 We would apply the opposition of things- order, disorder;
 symmetry, irregularity; health, illness; form, shapelessness;
 real-being, decay: in a word continuity against dissolution. 
 The first
 in each pair, no one could doubt, belong to the concept of good and
 therefore whatever tends to produce them must be ranged on the good
 side.
 
 Thus virtue and Intellectual-Principle and life and soul-
 reasoning soul, at least- belong to the idea of good and so
 therefore does all that a reasoned life aims at.
 
 Why not halt, then- it will be asked- at Intellectual-Principle
 and make that The Good? Soul and life are traces of
 Intellectual-Principle; that principle is the Term of Soul which on
 judgement sets itself towards Intellectual-Principle, pronouncing
 right preferable to wrong and virtue in every form to vice, and thus
 ranking by its choosing.
 
 The soul aiming only at that Principle would need a further
 lessoning; it must be taught that Intellectual-Principle is not the
 ultimate, that not all things look to that while all do look to the
 good. Not all that is outside of Intellectual-Principle seeks to
 attain it; what has attained it does not halt there but looks still
 towards good. Besides, Intellectual-Principle is sought upon motives
 of reasoning, the good before all reason. And in any striving
 towards life and continuity of existence and activity, the object is
 aimed at not as Intellectual-Principle but as good, as rising from
 good and leading to it: life itself is desirable only in 
 view of good.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 21
 
 21. Now what in all these objects of desire is the fundamental
 making them good?
 
 We must be bold:
 
 Intellectual-Principle and that life are of the order of good
 and hold their desirability, even they, in virtue of 
 belonging to that
 order; they have their goodness, I mean, because Life is an Activity
 in The Good,- Or rather, streaming from The Good- while
 Intellectual-Principle is an Activity already defined Therein; both
 are of radiant beauty and, because they come Thence and lead
 Thither, they are sought after by the soul-sought, that is, as
 things congenial though not veritably good while yet, as belonging
 to that order not to be rejected; the related, if not good, 
 is shunned
 in spite of that relationship, and even remote and ignobler 
 things may
 at times prove attractive.
 
 The intense love called forth by Life and Intellectual-Principle
 is due not to what they are but to the consideration of their nature
 as something apart, received from above themselves.
 
 Material forms, containing light incorporated in them, need
 still a light apart from them that their own light may be manifest;
 just so the Beings of that sphere, all lightsome, need another and a
 lordlier light or even they would not be visible to themselves and
 beyond.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 22
 
 22. That light known, then indeed we are stirred towards those
 Beings in longing and rejoicing over the radiance about them, just
 as earthly love is not for the material form but for the Beauty
 manifested upon it. Every one of those Beings exists for itself but
 becomes an object of desire by the colour cast upon it from The
 Good, source of those graces and of the love they evoke. The soul
 taking that outflow from the divine is stirred; seized with a
 Bacchic passion, goaded by these goads, it becomes Love. Before
 that, even Intellectual-Principle with all its loveliness 
 did not stir
 the soul; for that beauty is dead until it take the light of 
 The Good,
 and the soul lies supine, cold to all, unquickened even to
 Intellectual-Principle there before it. But when there enters into
 it a glow from the divine, it gathers strength, awakens, spreads
 true wings, and however urged by its nearer environing, speeds its
 buoyant way elsewhere, to something greater to its memory: so long
 as there exists anything loftier than the near, its very nature
 bears it upwards, lifted by the giver of that love. Beyond
 Intellectual-Principle it passes but beyond The Good it cannot, for
 nothing stands above That. Let it remain in 
 Intellectual-Principle and
 it sees the lovely and august, but it is not there possessed 
 of all it
 sought; the face it sees is beautiful no doubt but not of power to
 hold its gaze because lacking in the radiant grace which is the
 bloom upon beauty.
 
 Even here we have to recognise that beauty is that which
 irradiates symmetry rather than symmetry itself and is that which
 truly calls out our love.
 
 Why else is there more of the glory of beauty upon the living
 and only some faint trace of it upon the dead, though the face yet
 retains all its fulness and symmetry? Why are the most living
 portraits the most beautiful, even though the others happen 
 to be more
 symmetric? Why is the living ugly more attractive than the
 sculptured handsome? It is that the one is more nearly what we are
 looking for, and this because there is soul there, because there is
 more of the Idea of The Good, because there is some glow of the
 light of The Good and this illumination awakens and lifts 
 the soul and
 all that goes with it so that the whole man is won over to goodness,
 and in the fullest measure stirred to life.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 23
 
 23. That which soul must quest, that which sheds its light upon
 Intellectual-Principle, leaving its mark wherever it falls, surely
 we need not wonder that it be of power to draw to itself, 
 calling back
 from every wandering to rest before it. From it came all, 
 and so there
 is nothing mightier; all is feeble before it. Of all things the
 best, must it not be The Good? If by The Good we mean the principle
 most wholly self-sufficing, utterly without need of any other, what
 can it be but this? Before all the rest, it was what it was, 
 when evil
 had yet no place in things.
 
 If evil is a Later, there found where there is no trace of This-
 among the very ultimates, so that on the downward side evil has no
 beyond- then to This evil stands full contrary with no linking
 intermediate: This therefore is The Good: either good there is none,
 or if there must be, This and no other is it.
 
 And to deny the good would be to deny evil also; there 
 can then be
 no difference in objects coming up for choice: but that is untenable.
 
 To This looks all else that passes for good; This, to nothing.
 
 What then does it effect out of its greatness?
 
 It has produced Intellectual-Principle, it has produced Life,
 the souls which Intellectual-Principle sends forth and 
 everything else
 that partakes of Reason, of Intellectual-Principle or of Life.
 Source and spring of so much, how describe its goodness and 
 greatness?
 
 But what does it effect now?
 
 Even now it is preserver of what it produced; by it the
 Intellectual Beings have their Intellection and the living 
 their life;
 it breathes Intellect in breathes Life in and, where life is
 impossible, existence.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 24
 
 24. But ourselves- how does it touch us?
 
 We may recall what we have said of the nature of the 
 light shining
 from it into Intellectual-Principle and so by participation into the
 soul. But for the moment let us leave that aside and put another
 question:
 
 Does The Good hold that nature and name because some 
 outside thing
 finds it desirable? May we put it that a thing desirable to one is
 good to that one and that what is desirable to all is to be 
 recognised
 as The Good?
 
 No doubt this universal questing would make the goodness evident
 but still there must be in the nature something to earn that name.
 
 Further, is the questing determined by the hope of some
 acquisition or by sheer delight? If there is acquisition, what is
 it? If it is a matter of delight, why here rather than in something
 else?
 
 The question comes to this: Is goodness in the appropriate or in
 something apart, and is The Good good as regards itself also or good
 only as possessed?
 
 Any good is such, necessarily, not for itself but for something
 outside.
 
 But to what nature is This good? There is a nature to which
 nothing is good.
 
 And we must not overlook what some surly critic will surely
 bring up against us:
 
 What's all this: you scatter praises here, there and everywhere:
 Life is good, Intellectual-Principle is good: and yet The Good is
 above them; how then can Intellectual-Principle itself be good? Or
 what do we gain by seeing the Ideas themselves if we see only a
 particular Idea and nothing else [nothing "substantial"]? If we are
 happy here we may be deceived into thinking life a good when it is
 merely pleasant; but suppose our lot unhappy, why should we speak of
 good? Is mere personal existence good? What profit is there in it?
 What is the advantage in existence over utter non-existence- unless
 goodness is to be founded upon our love of self? It is the deception
 rooted in the nature of things and our dread of dissolution that
 lead to all the "goods" of your positing.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 25
 
 25. It is in view, probably, of this difficulty that 
 Plato, in the
 Philebus, makes pleasure an element in the Term; the good is not
 defined as a simplex or set in Intellectual-Principle alone; while
 he rightly refrains from identifying the good with the pleasant, yet
 he does not allow Intellectual-Principle, foreign to pleasure, to be
 The Good, since he sees no attractive power in it. He may also have
 had in mind that the good, to answer to its name, must be a thing of
 delight and that an object of pursuit must at least hold 
 some pleasure
 for those that acquire and possess it, so that where there is no joy
 the good too is absent, further that pleasure, implying pursuit,
 cannot pertain to the First and that therefore good cannot.
 
 All this was very well; there the enquiry was not as to 
 the Primal
 Good but as to ours; the good dealt with in that passage pertains to
 very different beings and therefore is a different good; it is a
 good falling short of that higher; it is a mingled thing; we are to
 understand that good does not hold place in the One and Alone whose
 being is too great and different for that.
 
 The good must, no doubt, be a thing pursued, not, however, good
 because it is pursued but pursued because it is good.
 
 The solution, it would seem, lies in priority:
 
 To the lowest of things the good is its immediate higher; each
 step represents the good to what stands lower so long as the
 movement does not tend awry but advances continuously towards the
 superior: thus there is a halt at the Ultimate, beyond which 
 no ascent
 is possible: that is the First Good, the authentic, the supremely
 sovereign, the source of good to the rest of things.
 
 Matter would have Forming-Idea for its good, since, were it
 conscious, it would welcome that; body would look to soul, without
 which it could not be or endure; soul must look to virtue; still
 higher stands Intellectual-Principle; above that again is the
 principle we call the Primal. Each of these progressive priors must
 have act upon those minors to which they are, respectively, the
 good: some will confer order and place, others life, others 
 wisdom and
 the good life: Intellectual-Principle will draw upon the Authentic
 Good which we hold to be coterminous with it, both as being an
 Activity put forth from it and as even now taking light from it.
 This good we will define later.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 26
 
 26. Any conscious being, if the good come to him, will know the
 good and affirm his possession of it.
 
 But what if one be deceived?
 
 In that case there must be some resemblance to account for the
 error: the good will be the original which the delusion
 counterfeited and whenever the true presents itself we turn from the
 spurious.
 
 All the striving, all the pain, show that to everything
 something is a good: the lifeless finds its share in 
 something outside
 itself; where there is life the longing for good sets up pursuit;
 the very dead are cared for and mourned for by the living; the
 living plan for their own good. The witness of attainment is
 betterment, cleaving to state, satisfaction, settlement, 
 suspension of
 pursuit. Here pleasure shows itself inadequate; its choice does not
 hold; repeated, it is no longer the same; it demands endless
 novelty. The good, worthy of the name, can be no such tasting of the
 casual; anyone that takes this kind of thing for the good goes
 empty, carrying away nothing but an emotion which the good might
 have produced. No one could be content to take his pleasure 
 thus in an
 emotion over a thing not possessed any more than over a child not
 there; I cannot think that those setting their good in bodily
 satisfactions find table-pleasure without the meal, or love-pleasure
 without intercourse with their chosen, or any pleasure where nothing
 is done.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 27
 
 27. But what is that whose entry supplies every such need?
 
 Some Idea, we maintain. There is a Form to which Matter aspires:
 to soul, moral excellence is this Form.
 
 But is this Form a good to the thing as being apt to it, does
 the striving aim at the apt?
 
 No: the aptest would be the most resemblant to the thing
 itself, but that, however sought and welcomed, does not suffice for
 the good: the good must be something more: to be a good to another a
 thing must have something beyond aptness; that only can be adopted
 as the good which represents the apt in its better form and 
 is best to
 what is best in the quester's self, to that which the quester tends
 potentially to be.
 
 A thing is potentially that to which its nature looks; this,
 obviously, it lacks; what it lacks, of its better, is its 
 good. Matter
 is of all that most in need; its next is the lowest Form; Form at
 lowest is just one grade higher than Matter. If a thing is a good to
 itself, much more must its perfection, its Form, its better, 
 be a good
 to it; this better, good in its own nature, must be good also to the
 quester whose good it procures.
 
 But why should the Form which makes a thing good be a 
 good to that
 thing? As being most appropriate?
 
 No: but because it is, itself, a portion of the Good. This is
 why the least alloyed and nearest to the good are most at 
 peace within
 themselves.
 
 It is surely out of place to ask why a thing good in its own
 nature should be a good; we can hardly suppose it dissatisfied with
 its own goodness so that it must strain outside its essential
 quality to the good which it effectually is.
 
 There remains the question with regard to the Simplex: 
 where there
 is utter absence of distinction does this self-aptness constitute
 the good to that Simplex?
 
 If thus far we have been right, the striving of the lower
 possesses itself of the good as of a thing resident in a 
 certain Kind,
 and it is not the striving that constitutes the good but the 
 good that
 calls out the striving: where the good is attained something is
 acquired and on this acquisition there follows pleasure. But 
 the thing
 must be chosen even though no pleasure ensued; it must be desirable
 for its own sake.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 28
 
 28. Now to see what all this reasoning has established:
 
 Universally, what approaches as a good is a Form; Matter itself
 contains this good which is Form: are we to conclude that, if Matter
 had will, it would desire to be Form unalloyed?
 
 No: that would be desiring its own destruction, for the 
 good seeks
 to subject everything to itself. But perhaps Matter would not wish
 to remain at its own level but would prefer to attain Being and,
 this acquired, to lay aside its evil.
 
 If we are asked how the evil thing can have tendency towards the
 good, we answer that we have not attributed tendency to Matter; our
 argument needed the hypothesis of sensation in Matter- in so far as
 possible consistently with retention of its character- and 
 we asserted
 that the entry of Form, that dream of the Good, must raise it to a
 nobler order. If then Matter is Evil, there is no more to be said;
 if it is something else- a wrong thing, let us say- then in the
 hypothesis that its essence acquire sensation would not the
 appropriate upon the next or higher plane be its good, as in 
 the other
 cases? But not what is evil in Matter would be the quester 
 of good but
 that element in it [lowest Form] which in it is associated with evil.
 
 But if Matter by very essence is evil how could it choose the
 good?
 
 This question implies that if Evil were self-conscious it would
 admire itself: but how can the unadmirable be admired; and did we
 not discover that the good must be apt to the nature?
 
 There that question may rest. But if universally the good is
 Form and the higher the ascent the more there is of Form-Soul more
 truly Form than body is and phases of soul progressively of higher
 Form and Intellectual-Principle standing as Form to soul 
 collectively-
 then the Good advances by the opposite of Matter and, therefore, by
 a cleansing and casting away to the utmost possible at each 
 stage: and
 the greatest good must be there where all that is of Matter has
 disappeared. The Principle of Good rejecting Matter entirely- or
 rather never having come near it at any point or in any way- 
 must hold
 itself aloft with that Formless in which Primal Form takes 
 its origin.
 But we will return to this.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 29
 
 29. Suppose, however, that pleasure did not result from the good
 but there were something preceding pleasure and accounting for it,
 would not this be a thing to be embraced?
 
 But when we say "to be embraced" we say "pleasure."
 
 But what if accepting its existence, we think of that 
 existence as
 leaving still the possibility that it were not a thing to be 
 embraced?
 
 This would mean the good being present and the sentient
 possessor failing, nonetheless, to perceive it.
 
 It would seem possible, however, to perceive and yet be 
 unmoved by
 the possession; this is quite likely in the case of the wiser and
 least dependent- and indeed it is so with the First, immune 
 not merely
 because simplex, but because pleasure by acquisition implies lack.
 
 But all this will become clear on the solution of our remaining
 difficulties and the rebuttal of the argument brought up against us.
 This takes the form of the question: "What gain is there in the Good
 to one who, fully conscious, feels nothing when he hears of these
 things, whether because he has no grasp of them but takes merely the
 words or because he holds to false values, perhaps being all 
 in search
 of sense, finding his good in money or such things?"
 
 The answer is that even in his disregard of the good proposed he
 is with us in setting a good before him but fails to see how the
 good we define fits into his own conception. It is impossible to say
 "Not that" if one is utterly without experience or conception of the
 "That"; there will generally have been, even, some inkling 
 of the good
 beyond Intellection. Besides, one attaining or approaching the good,
 but not recognising it, may assure himself in the light of its
 contraries; otherwise he will not even hold ignorance an evil though
 everyone prefers to know and is proud of knowing so that our very
 sensations seek to ripen into knowledge.
 
 If the knowing principle- and specially primal
 Intellectual-Principle- is valuable and beautiful, what must be
 present to those of power to see the Author and Father of Intellect?
 Anyone thinking slightingly of this principle of Life and 
 Being brings
 evidence against himself and all his state: of course, distaste for
 the life that is mingled with death does not touch that Life
 Authentic.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 30
 
 30. Whether pleasure must enter into the good, so that 
 life in the
 contemplation of the divine things and especially of their source
 remains still imperfect, is a question not to be ignored in any
 enquiry into the nature of the good.
 
 Now to found the good upon the Intellect and upon that state of
 soul or mind which springs from wisdom does not imply that the end
 or the absolute good is the conjunction [of Intellect and state]: it
 would follow merely that Intellect is the good and that we feel
 happy in possession of that good. That is one theory; another
 associates pleasure with Intellect in the sense that the 
 Good is taken
 to be some one thing founded upon both but depending upon our
 attaining or at least contemplating an Intellect so modified; this
 theory would maintain that the isolated and unrelated could be the
 good, could be an object of desire.
 
 But how could Intellect and pleasure combine into one mutually
 complementary nature?
 
 Bodily pleasure no one, certainly, would think capable 
 of blending
 in with Intellect; the unreasoning satisfactions of soul [or lower
 mind] are equally incompatible with it.
 
 Every activity, state, and life, will be followed and as it were
 escorted by the over-dwelling consciousness; sometimes as these take
 their natural course they will be met by hindrance and by 
 intrusion of
 the conflicting so that the life is the less self-guided; sometimes
 the natural activity is unmixed, wholly free, and then the life
 goes brilliantly; this last state is judged the pleasantest, the
 most to be chosen; so, for lack of an accurate expression, we hear
 of "Intellect in conjunction with pleasure." But this is no more
 than metaphor, like a hundred others drawn by the poets from our
 natural likings- "Drunk with nectar," "To banquet and feast," "The
 Father smiled." No: the veritably pleasant lies away in that other
 realm, the most to be loved and sought for, not something brought
 about and changing but the very principle of all the colour and
 radiance and brightness found here. This is why we read of "Truth
 introduced into the Mixture" and of the "measuring standard 
 as a prior
 condition" and are told that the symmetry and beauty necessary to
 the Mixture come Thence into whatever has beauty; it is in this way
 that we have our share in Beauty; but in another way, also, 
 we achieve
 the truly desirable, that is by leading our selves up to what is
 best within us; this best is what is symmetry, beauty, collective
 Idea, life clear, Intellective and good.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 31
 
 31. But since Thence come the beauty and light in all, it is
 Thence that Intellectual-Principle took the brilliance of the
 Intellectual Energy which flashed Nature into being; Thence soul
 took power towards life, in virtue of that fuller life streaming
 into it. Intellectual-Principle was raised thus to that Supreme and
 remains with it, happy in that presence. Soul too, that soul which
 as possessing knowledge and vision was capable, clung to what it
 saw; and as its vision so its rapture; it saw and was stricken; but
 having in itself something of that principle it felt its kinship and
 was moved to longing like those stirred by the image of the 
 beloved to
 desire of the veritable presence. Lovers here mould themselves to
 the beloved; they seek to increase their attraction of person and
 their likeness of mind; they are unwilling to fall short in moral
 quality or in other graces lest they be distasteful to those
 possessing such merit- and only among such can true love be. In the
 same way the soul loves the Supreme Good, from its very beginnings
 stirred by it to love. The soul which has never strayed from 
 this love
 waits for no reminding from the beauty of our world: holding that
 love- perhaps unawares- it is ever in quest, and, in its 
 longing to be
 borne Thither, passes over what is lovely here and with one glance
 at the beauty of the universe dismisses all; for it sees that all is
 put together of flesh and Matter, befouled by its housing, made
 fragmentary by corporal extension, not the Authentic Beauty which
 could never venture into the mud of body to be soiled, annulled.
 
 By only noting the flux of things it knows at once that from
 elsewhere comes the beauty that floats upon them and so it is urged
 Thither, passionate in pursuit of what it loves: never- 
 unless someone
 robs it of that love- never giving up till it attain.
 
 There indeed all it saw was beautiful and veritable; it grew in
 strength by being thus filled with the life of the True; itself
 becoming veritable Being and attaining veritable knowledge, it
 enters by that neighbouring into conscious possession of what it has
 long been seeking.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 32
 
 32. Where, then? where exists the author of this beauty and
 life, the begetter of the veritable?
 
 You see the splendour over the things of the universe 
 with all the
 variety begotten of the Ideas; well might we linger here: 
 but amid all
 these things of beauty we cannot but ask whence they come and whence
 the beauty. This source can be none of the beautiful objects; were
 it so, it too would be a thing of parts. It can be no shape, 
 no power,
 nor the total of powers and shapes that have had the 
 becoming that has
 set them here; it must stand above all the powers, all the patterns.
 The origin of all this must be the formless- formless not as lacking
 shape but as the very source of even shape Intellectual.
 
 In the realm of process anything coming to be must come to be
 something; to every thing its distinctive shape: but what shape can
 that have which no one has shaped? It can be none of existing
 things; yet it is all: none, in that beings are later; all, as the
 wellspring from which they flow. That which can make all can have,
 itself, no extension; it must be limitless and so without magnitude;
 magnitude itself is of the Later and cannot be an element in that
 which is to bring it into being. The greatness of the 
 Authentic cannot
 be a greatness of quantity; all extension must belong to the
 subsequent: the Supreme is great in the sense only that there can be
 nothing mightier, nothing to equal it, nothing with anything 
 in common
 with it: how then could anything be equal to any part of its
 content? Its eternity and universal reach entail neither measure nor
 measurelessness; given either, how could it be the measure of
 things? So with shape: granted beauty, the absence of shape 
 or form to
 be grasped is but enhancement of desire and love; the love will be
 limitless as the object is, an infinite love.
 
 Its beauty, too, will be unique, a beauty above beauty: it
 cannot be beauty since it is not a thing among things. It is lovable
 and the author of beauty; as the power to all beautiful 
 shape, it will
 be the ultimate of beauty, that which brings all loveliness to be;
 it begets beauty and makes it yet more beautiful by the excess of
 beauty streaming from itself, the source and height of beauty. As
 the source of beauty it makes beautiful whatsoever springs from it.
 And this conferred beauty is not itself in shape; the thing 
 that comes
 to be is without shape, though in another sense shaped; what is
 denoted by shape is, in itself, an attribute of something else,
 shapeless at first. Not the beauty but its participant takes the
 shape.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 33
 
 33. When therefore we name beauty, all such shape must be
 dismissed; nothing visible is to be conceived, or at once we descend
 from beauty to what but bears the name in virtue of some faint
 participation. This formless Form is beautiful as Form, beautiful in
 proportion as we strip away all shape even that given in thought to
 mark difference, as for instance the difference between Justice and
 Sophrosyne, beautiful in their difference.
 
 The Intellectual-Principle is the less for seeing things as
 distinct even in its act of grasping in unity the multiple content
 of its Intellectual realm; in its knowing of the particular it
 possesses itself of one Intellectual shape; but, even thus, in this
 dealing with variety as unity, it leaves us still with the question
 how we are to envisage that which stands beyond this all-lovely,
 beyond this principle at once multiple and above multiplicity, the
 Supreme for which the soul hungers though unable to tell why such a
 being should stir its longing-reason, however, urging that This at
 last is the Authentic Term because the Nature best and most to be
 loved may be found there only where there is no least touch of Form.
 Bring something under Form and present it so before the mind;
 immediately we ask what Beyond imposed that shape; reason 
 answers that
 while there exists the giver having shape to give- a giver that is
 shape, idea, an entirely measured thing- yet this is not 
 alone, is not
 adequate in itself, is not beautiful in its own right but is 
 a mingled
 thing. Shape and idea and measure will always be beautiful, but the
 Authentic Beauty and the Beyond-Beauty cannot be under measure and
 therefore cannot have admitted shape or be Idea: the primal
 existent, The First, must be without Form; the beauty in it must be,
 simply, the Nature of the Intellectual Good.
 
 Take an example from love: so long as the attention is upon the
 visible form, love has not entered: when from that outward form the
 lover elaborates within himself, in his own partless soul, an
 immaterial image, then it is that love is born, then the lover longs
 for the sight of the beloved to make that fading image live again.
 If he could but learn to look elsewhere, to the more nearly
 formless, his longing would be for that: his first experience was
 loving a great luminary by way of some thin gleam from it.
 
 Shape is an impress from the unshaped; it is the unshaped that
 produces shape, not shape the unshaped; and Matter is needed for the
 producing; Matter, in the nature of things, is the furthest away,
 since of itself it has not even the lowest degree of shape. Thus
 lovableness does not belong to Matter but to that which draws upon
 Form: the Form upon Matter comes by way of soul; soul is more nearly
 Form and therefore more lovable; Intellectual-Principle, 
 nearer still,
 is even more to be loved: by these steps we are led to know that the
 First Principle, principle of Beauty, must be formless.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 34
 
 34. No longer can we wonder that the principle evoking such
 longing should be utterly free from shape. The very soul, once it
 has conceived the straining love towards this, lays aside all the
 shape it has taken, even to the Intellectual shape that has informed
 it. There is no vision, no union, for those handling or acting by
 any thing other; the soul must see before it neither evil 
 nor good nor
 anything else, that alone it may receive the Alone.
 
 Suppose the soul to have attained: the highest has come 
 to her, or
 rather has revealed its presence; she has turned away from all about
 her and made herself apt, beautiful to the utmost, brought into
 likeness with the divine by those preparings and adornings which
 come unbidden to those growing ready for the vision- she has 
 seen that
 presence suddenly manifesting within her, for there is nothing
 between: here is no longer a duality but a two in one; for, 
 so long as
 the presence holds, all distinction fades: it is as lover and
 beloved here, in a copy of that union, long to blend; the 
 soul has now
 no further awareness of being in body and will give herself 
 no foreign
 name, not "man," not "living being," not "being," not "all"; any
 observation of such things falls away; the soul has neither time nor
 taste for them; This she sought and This she has found and 
 on This she
 looks and not upon herself; and who she is that looks she has not
 leisure to know. Once There she will barter for This nothing the
 universe holds; not though one would make over the heavens entire to
 her; than This there is nothing higher, nothing of more good; above
 This there is no passing; all the rest, however lofty, lies on the
 downgoing path: she is of perfect judgement and knows that This was
 her quest, that nothing higher is. Here can be no deceit; where
 could she come upon truer than the truth? and the truth she affirms,
 that she is, herself; but all the affirmation is later and is
 silent. In this happiness she knows beyond delusion that she 
 is happy;
 for this is no affirmation of an excited body but of a soul become
 again what she was in the time of her early joy. All that she had
 welcomed of old-office, power, wealth, beauty, knowledge of all she
 tells her scorn as she never could had she not found their better;
 linked to This she can fear no disaster nor even know it; let all
 about her fall to pieces, so she would have it that she may be
 wholly with This, so huge the happiness she has won to.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 35
 
 35. Such in this union is the soul's temper that even the act of
 Intellect, once so intimately loved, she now dismisses; Intellection
 is movement and she has no wish to move; she has nothing to say of
 this very Intellectual-Principle by means of which she has attained
 the vision, herself made over into Intellectual-Principle 
 and becoming
 that principle so as to be able to take stand in that Intellectual
 space. Entered there and making herself over to that, she at first
 contemplates that realm, but once she sees that higher still she
 leaves all else aside. Thus when a man enters a house rich in beauty
 he might gaze about and admire the varied splendour before the
 master appears; but, face to face with that great person- no thing
 of ornament but calling for the truest attention- he would ignore
 everything else and look only to the master. In this state 
 of absorbed
 contemplation there is no longer question of holding an object: the
 vision is continuous so that seeing and seen are one thing; 
 object and
 act of vision have become identical; of all that until then 
 filled the
 eye no memory remains. And our comparison would be closer if instead
 of a man appearing to the visitor who had been admiring the house it
 were a god, and not a god manifesting to the eyes but one filling
 the soul.
 
 Intellectual-Principle, thus, has two powers, first that of
 grasping intellectively its own content, the second that of an
 advancing and receiving whereby to know its transcendent; at first
 it sees, later by that seeing it takes possession of
 Intellectual-Principle, becoming one only thing with that: the first
 seeing is that of Intellect knowing, the second that of Intellect
 loving; stripped of its wisdom in the intoxication of the nectar, it
 comes to love; by this excess it is made simplex and is happy; and
 to be drunken is better for it than to be too staid for these revels.
 
 But is its vision parcelwise, thing here and thing there?
 
 No: reason unravelling gives process; Intellectual-Principle has
 unbroken knowledge and has, moreover, an Act unattended by knowing,
 a vision by another approach. In this seeing of the Supreme 
 it becomes
 pregnant and at once knows what has come to be within it; its
 knowledge of its content is what is designated by its Intellection;
 its knowing of the Supreme is the virtue of that power within it by
 which, in a later [lower] stage it is to become "Intellective."
 
 As for soul, it attains that vision by- so to speak- confounding
 and annulling the Intellectual-Principle within it; or rather that
 Principle immanent in soul sees first and thence the vision 
 penetrates
 to soul and the two visions become one.
 
 The Good spreading out above them and adapting itself to that
 union which it hastens to confirm is present to them as giver of a
 blessed sense and sight; so high it lifts them that they are 
 no longer
 in space or in that realm of difference where everything is 
 root,ed in
 some other thing; for The Good is not in place but is the 
 container of
 the Intellectual place; The Good is in nothing but itself.
 
 The soul now knows no movement since the Supreme knows 
 none; it is
 now not even soul since the Supreme is not in life but above life;
 it is no longer Intellectual-Principle, for the Supreme has not
 Intellection and the likeness must be perfect; this grasping is not
 even by Intellection, for the Supreme is not known Intellectively.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 36
 
 36. We need not carry this matter further; we turn to a question
 already touched but demanding still some brief consideration.
 
 Knowledge of The Good or contact with it, is the all-important:
 this- we read- is the grand learning, the learning we are to
 understand, not of looking towards it but attaining, first, some
 knowledge of it. We come to this learning by analogies, by
 abstractions, by our understanding of its subsequents, of all that
 is derived from The Good, by the upward steps towards it. 
 Purification
 has The Good for goal; so the virtues, all right ordering, ascent
 within the Intellectual, settlement therein, banqueting upon the
 divine- by these methods one becomes, to self and to all 
 else, at once
 seen and seer; identical with Being and Intellectual-Principle 
 and the
 entire living all, we no longer see the Supreme as an 
 external; we are
 near now, the next is That and it is close at hand, radiant above
 the Intellectual.
 
 Here, we put aside all the learning; disciplined to this pitch,
 established in beauty, the quester holds knowledge still of 
 the ground
 he rests on but, suddenly, swept beyond it all by the very crest of
 the wave of Intellect surging beneath, he is lifted and sees, never
 knowing how; the vision floods the eyes with light, but it is not a
 light showing some other object, the light is itself the vision. No
 longer is there thing seen and light to show it, no longer Intellect
 and object of Intellection; this is the very radiance that brought
 both Intellect and Intellectual object into being for the later use
 and allowed them to occupy the quester's mind. With This he himself
 becomes identical, with that radiance whose Act is to engender
 Intellectual-Principle, not losing in that engendering but for ever
 unchanged, the engendered coming to be simply because that Supreme
 exists. If there were no such principle above change, no derivative
 could rise.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 37
 
 37. Those ascribing Intellection to the First have not supposed
 him to know the lesser, the emanant- though, indeed, some 
 have thought
 it impossible that he should not know everything. But those denying
 his knowing of the lesser have still attributed self-knowing to him,
 because they find nothing nobler; we are to suppose that so he is
 the more august, as if Intellection were something nobler than his
 own manner of being not something whose value derives from him.
 
 But we ask in what must his grandeur lie, in his Intellection or
 in himself. If in the Intellection, he has no worth or the 
 less worth;
 if in himself, he is perfect before the Intellection, not 
 perfected by
 it. We may be told that he must have Intellection because he is an
 Act, not a potentiality. Now if this means that he is an essence
 eternally intellective, he is represented as a duality- essence and
 Intellective Act- he ceases to be a simplex; an external has been
 added: it is just as the eyes are not the same as their sight,
 though the two are inseparable. If on the other hand by this
 actualization it is meant that he is Act and Intellection, then as
 being Intellection he does not exercise it, just as movement is not
 itself in motion.
 
 But do not we ourselves assert that the Beings There are essence
 and Act?
 
 The Beings, yes, but they are to us manifold and differentiated:
 the First we make a simplex; to us Intellection begins with the
 emanant in its seeking of its essence, of itself, of its author;
 bent inward for this vision and having a present thing to know,
 there is every reason why it should be a principle of Intellection;
 but that which, never coming into being, has no prior but is 
 ever what
 it is, how could that have motive to Intellection? As Plato rightly
 says, it is above Intellect.
 
 An Intelligence not exercising Intellection would be
 unintelligent; where the nature demands knowing, not to know is to
 fail of intelligence; but where there is no function, why import one
 and declare a defect because it is not performed? We might as well
 complain because the Supreme does not act as a physician. He has no
 task, we hold, because nothing can present itself to him to be done;
 he is sufficient; he need seek nothing beyond himself, he who is
 over all; to himself and to all he suffices by simply being what he
 is.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 38
 
 38. And yet this "He Is" does not truly apply: the Supreme has
 no need of Being: even "He is good" does not apply since it
 indicates Being: the "is" should not suggest something predicated of
 another thing; it is to state identity. The word "good" used 
 of him is
 not a predicate asserting his possession of goodness; it conveys an
 identification. It is not that we think it exact to call him either
 good or The Good: it is that sheer negation does not indicate; we
 use the term The Good to assert identity without the affirmation of
 Being.
 
 But how admit a Principle void of self-knowledge,
 self-awareness; surely the First must be able to say "I possess
 Being?"
 
 But he does not possess Being.
 
 Then, at least he must say "I am good?"
 
 No: once more, that would be an affirmation of Being.
 
 But surely he may affirm merely the goodness, adding nothing:
 the goodness would be taken without the being and all 
 duality avoided?
 
 No: such self-awareness as good must inevitably carry the
 affirmation "I am the Good"; otherwise there would be merely the
 unattached conception of goodness with no recognition of 
 identity; any
 such intellection would inevitably include the affirmation "I am."
 
 If that intellection were the Good, then the intellection would
 not be self-intellection but intellection of the Good; not 
 the Supreme
 but that intellection would be the Good: if on the contrary that
 intellection of the Good is distinct from the Good, at once the Good
 exists before its knowing; all-sufficiently good in itself, it needs
 none of that knowing of its own nature.
 
 Thus the Supreme does not know itself as Good.
 
 As what then?
 
 No such foreign matter is present to it: it can have only an
 immediate intuition self-directed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 39
 
 39. Since the Supreme has no interval, no self-differentiation
 what can have this intuitional approach to it but itself? 
 Therefore it
 quite naturally assumes difference at the point where
 Intellectual-Principle and Being are differentiated.
 
 Intellect, to act at all, must inevitably comport difference
 with identity; otherwise it could not distinguish itself from its
 object by standing apart from it, nor could it ever be aware of the
 realm of things whose existence demands otherness, nor could there
 be so much as a duality.
 
 Again, if the Supreme is to have intellection it cannot know
 only itself; that would not be intellection, for, if it did know
 itself, nothing could prevent it knowing all things; but this is
 impossible. With self-intellection it would no longer be simplex;
 any intellection, even in the Supreme, must be aware of something
 distinct; as we have been saying, the inability to see the self as
 external is the negation of intellection. That act requires a
 manifold-agent, object, movement and all the other conditions of a
 thinking principle. Further we must remember what has been indicated
 elsewhere that, since every intellectual act in order to be what it
 must be requires variety, every movement simple and the same
 throughout, though it may comport some form of contact, is devoid of
 the intellective.
 
 It follows that the Supreme will know neither itself nor
 anything else but will hold an august repose. All the rest is later;
 before them all, This was what This was; any awareness of that other
 would be acquired, the shifting knowledge of the instable. Even in
 knowing the stable he would be manifold, for it is not possible
 that, while in the act of knowing the laters possess themselves of
 their object, the Supreme should know only in some unpossessing
 observation.
 
 As regards Providence, that is sufficiently saved by the 
 fact that
 This is the source from which all proceeds; the dependent he cannot
 know when he has no knowledge of himself but keeps that 
 august repose.
 Plato dealing with essential Being allows it intellection 
 but not this
 august repose: intellection then belongs to Essential Being; this
 august repose to the Principle in which there is no intellection.
 Repose, of course, is used here for want of a fitter word; we are to
 understand that the most august, the truly so, is That which
 transcends [the movement of] Intellection.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 40
 
 40. That there can be no intellection in the First will be
 patent to those that have had such contact; but some further
 confirmation is desirable, if indeed words can carry the matter; we
 need overwhelming persuasion.
 
 It must be borne in mind that all intellection rises in some
 principle and takes cognisance of an object. But a distinction is to
 be made:
 
 There is the intellection that remains within its place 
 of origin;
 it has that source as substratum but becomes a sort of addition to
 it in that it is an activity of that source perfecting the
 potentiality there, not by producing anything but as being a
 completing power to the principle in which it inheres. There is also
 the intellection inbound with Being- Being's very author- and this
 could not remain confined to the source since there it could produce
 nothing; it is a power to production; it produces therefore 
 of its own
 motion and its act is Real-Being and there it has its dwelling. In
 this mode the intellection is identical with Being; even in its
 self-intellection no distinction is made save the logical
 distinction of thinker and thought with, as we have often observed,
 the implication of plurality.
 
 This is a first activity and the substance it produces is
 Essential Being; it is an image, but of an original so great that
 the very copy stands a reality. If instead of moving outward it
 remained with the First, it would be no more than some 
 appurtenance of
 that First, not a self-standing existent.
 
 At the earliest activity and earliest intellection, it can be
 preceded by no act or intellection: if we pass beyond this being and
 this intellection we come not to more being and more intellection
 but to what overpasses both, to the wonderful which has neither,
 asking nothing of these products and standing its unaccompanied self.
 
 That all-transcending cannot have had an activity by which to
 produce this activity- acting before act existed- or have had
 thought in order to produce thinking- applying thought before
 thought exists- all intellection, even of the Good, is beneath it.
 
 In sum, this intellection of the Good is impossible: I 
 do not mean
 that it is impossible to have intellection of the Good- we may admit
 the possibility but there can be no intellection by The Good itself,
 for this would be to include the inferior with the Good.
 
 If intellection is the lower, then it will be bound up 
 with Being;
 if intellection is the higher, its object is lower. Intellection,
 then, does not exist in the Good; as a lesser, taking its worth
 through that Good, it must stand apart from it, leaving the Good
 unsoiled by it as by all else. Immune from intellection the Good
 remains incontaminably what it is, not impeded by the presence of
 the intellectual act which would annul its purity and unity.
 
 Anyone making the Good at once Thinker and Thought identifies it
 with Being and with the Intellection vested in Being so that it must
 perform that act of intellection: at once it becomes 
 necessary to find
 another principle, one superior to that Good: for either this act,
 this intellection, is a completing power of some such principle,
 serving as its ground, or it points, by that duality, to a prior
 principle having intellection as a characteristic. It is 
 because there
 is something before it that it has an object of intellection; even
 in its self-intellection, it may be said to know its content by its
 vision of that prior.
 
 What has no prior and no external accompaniment could have no
 intellection, either of itself or of anything else. What could it
 aim at, what desire? To essay its power of knowing? But this would
 make the power something outside itself; there would be, I mean, the
 power it grasped and the power by which it grasped: if there is but
 the one power, what is there to grasp at?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 41
 
 41. Intellection seems to have been given as an aid to 
 the diviner
 but weaker beings, an eye to the blind. But the eye itself need not
 see Being since it is itself the light; what must take the light
 through the eye needs the light because of its darkness. If, then,
 intellection is the light and light does not need the light, surely
 that brilliance (The First) which does not need light can 
 have no need
 of intellection, will not add this to its nature.
 
 What could it do with intellection? What could even intellection
 need and add to itself for the purpose of its act? It has no
 self-awareness; there is no need. It is no duality but, rather, a
 manifold, consisting of itself, its intellective act, distinct from
 itself, and the inevitable third, the object of 
 intellection. No doubt
 since knower, knowing, and known, are identical, all merges into a
 unity: but the distinction has existed and, once more, such a unity
 cannot be the First; we must put away all otherness from the Supreme
 which can need no such support; anything we add is so much lessening
 of what lacks nothing.
 
 To us intellection is a boon since the soul needs it; to the
 Intellectual-Principle it is appropriate as being one thing with the
 very essence of the principle constituted by the intellectual Act so
 that principle and act coincide in a continuous self-consciousness
 carrying the assurance of identity, of the unity of the two. But
 pure unity must be independent, in need of no such assurance.
 
 "Know yourself" is a precept for those who, being manifold, have
 the task of appraising themselves so as to become aware of the
 number and nature of their constituents, some or all of which they
 ignore as they ignore their very principle and their manner of
 being. The First on the contrary if it have content must exist in a
 way too great to have any knowledge, intellection, perception of it.
 To itself it is nothing; accepting nothing, self-sufficing, it is
 not even a good to itself: to others it is good for they have need
 of it; but it could not lack itself: it would be absurd to 
 suppose The
 Good standing in need of goodness.
 
 It does not see itself: seeing aims at acquisition: all this it
 abandons to the subsequent: in fact nothing found elsewhere can be
 There; even Being cannot be There. Nor therefore has it intellection
 which is a thing of the lower sphere where the first 
 intellection, the
 only true, is identical with Being. Reason, perception,
 intelligence, none of these can have place in that Principle in
 which no presence can be affirmed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 42
 
 42. Faced by the difficulty of placing these powers, you must in
 reason allocate to the secondaries what you count august:
 secondaries must not be foisted upon the First, or 
 tertiaries upon the
 secondaries. Secondaries are to be ranged under the First,
 tertiaries under the secondaries: this is giving everything 
 its place,
 the later dependent on their priors, those priors free.
 
 This is included in that true saying "About the King of All, all
 has being and in view of Him all is": we are to understand from the
 attribution of all things to Him, and from, the words "in 
 view of Him"
 that He is their cause and they reach to Him as to something 
 differing
 from them all and containing nothing that they contain: for
 certainly His very nature requires that nothing of the later be in
 Him.
 
 Thus, Intellectual-Principle, finding place in the universe,
 cannot have place in Him. Where we read that He is the cause of all
 beauty we are clearly to understand that beauty depends upon the
 Forms, He being set above all that is beautiful here. The 
 Forms are in
 that passage secondaries, their sequels being attached to them as
 dependent thirds: it is clear thus that by "the products of the
 thirds" is meant this world, dependent upon soul.
 
 Soul dependent upon Intellectual-Principle and
 Intellectual-Principle upon the Good, all is linked to the Supreme
 by intermediaries, some close, some nearing those of the closer
 attachment, while the order of sense stands remotest, dependent upon
 soul.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 EIGHTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON FREE-WILL AND THE WILL OF THE ONE.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. Can there be question as to whether the gods have voluntary
 action? Or are we to take it that, while we may well enquire in the
 case of men with their combination of powerlessness and hesitating
 power, the gods must be declared omnipotent, not merely some things
 but all lying at their nod? Or is power entire, freedom of action in
 all things, to be reserved to one alone, of the rest some being
 powerful, others powerless, others again a blend of power and
 impotence?
 
 All this must come to the test: we must dare it even of 
 the Firsts
 and of the All-Transcendent and, if we find omnipotence 
 possible, work
 out how far freedom extends. The very notion of power must be
 scrutinized lest in this ascription we be really making power
 identical with Essential Act, and even with Act not yet achieved.
 
 But for the moment we may pass over these questions to deal with
 the traditional problem of freedom of action in ourselves.
 
 To begin with, what must be intended when we assert that 
 something
 is in our power; what is the conception here?
 
 To establish this will help to show whether we are to ascribe
 freedom to the gods and still more to God, or to refuse it, or
 again, while asserting it, to question still, in regard both to the
 higher and lower- the mode of its presence.
 
 What then do we mean when we speak of freedom in 
 ourselves and why
 do we question it?
 
 My own reading is that, moving as we do amid adverse fortunes,
 compulsions, violent assaults of passion crushing the soul, feeling
 ourselves mastered by these experiences, playing slave to them,
 going where they lead, we have been brought by all this to doubt
 whether we are anything at all and dispose of ourselves in any
 particular.
 
 This would indicate that we think of our free act as one which
 we execute of our own choice, in no servitude to chance or necessity
 or overmastering passion, nothing thwarting our will; the 
 voluntary is
 conceived as an event amenable to will and occurring or not as our
 will dictates. Everything will be voluntary that is produced under
 no compulsion and with knowledge; our free act is what we are
 masters to perform.
 
 Differing conceptually, the two conditions will often 
 coincide but
 sometimes will clash. Thus a man would be master to kill, but the
 act will not be voluntary if in the victim he had failed to
 recognise his own father. Perhaps however that ignorance is not
 compatible with real freedom: for the knowledge necessary to a
 voluntary act cannot be limited to certain particulars but must
 cover the entire field. Why, for example, should killing be
 involuntary in the failure to recognise a father and not so in the
 failure to recognise the wickedness of murder? If because the killer
 ought to have learned, still ignorance of the duty of 
 learning and the
 cause of that ignorance remain alike involuntary.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. A cardinal question is where we are to place the freedom of
 action ascribed to us.
 
 It must be founded in impulse or in some appetite, as when we
 act or omit in lust or rage or upon some calculation of advantage
 accompanied by desire.
 
 But if rage or desire implied freedom we must allow freedom to
 animals, infants, maniacs, the distraught, the victims of
 malpractice producing incontrollable delusions. And if freedom turns
 on calculation with desire, does this include faulty calculation?
 Sound calculation, no doubt, and sound desire; but then comes the
 question whether the appetite stirs the calculation or the 
 calculation
 the appetite.
 
 Where the appetites are dictated by the very nature they are the
 desires of the conjoint of soul and body and then soul lies under
 physical compulsions: if they spring in the soul as an independent,
 then much that we take to be voluntary is in reality outside of our
 free act. Further, every emotion is preceded by some meagre 
 reasoning;
 how then can a compelling imagination, an appetite drawing 
 us where it
 will, be supposed to leave us masters in the ensuing act? Need,
 inexorably craving satisfaction, is not free in face of that to
 which it is forced: and how at all can a thing have efficiency of
 its own when it rises from an extern, has an extern for very
 principle, thence taking its Being as it stands? It lives by that
 extern, lives as it has been moulded: if this be freedom, there is
 freedom in even the soulless; fire acts in accordance with its
 characteristic being.
 
 We may be reminded that the Living Form and the soul know what
 they do. But, if this is knowledge by perception, it does not help
 towards the freedom of the act; perception gives awareness, not
 mastery: if true knowing is meant, either this is the knowing of
 something happening- once more awareness- with the motive- 
 force still
 to seek, or the reasoning and knowledge have acted to quell the
 appetite; then we have to ask to what this repression is to be
 referred and where it has taken place. If it is that the mental
 process sets up an opposing desire we must assure ourselves 
 how; if it
 merely stills the appetite with no further efficiency and this is
 our freedom, then freedom does not depend upon act but is a thing of
 the mind- and in truth all that has to do with act, the very most
 reasonable, is still of mixed value and cannot carry freedom.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. All this calls for examination; the enquiry must 
 bring us close
 to the solution as regards the gods.
 
 We have traced self-disposal to will, will to reasoning and,
 next step, to right reasoning; perhaps to right reasoning we must
 add knowledge, for however sound opinion and act may be they do not
 yield true freedom when the adoption of the right course is 
 the result
 of hazard or of some presentment from the fancy with no knowledge of
 the foundations of that rightness.
 
 Taking it that the presentment of fancy is not a matter of our
 will and choice, how can we think those acting at its dictation to
 be free agents? Fancy strictly, in our use, takes it rise from
 conditions of the body; lack of food and drink sets up presentments,
 and so does the meeting of these needs; similarly with seminal
 abundance and other humours of the body. We refuse to range under
 the principle of freedom those whose conduct is directed by such
 fancy: the baser sort, therefore, mainly so guided, cannot 
 be credited
 with self-disposal or voluntary act. Self-disposal, to us, belongs
 to those who, through the activities of the Intellectual-Principle,
 live above the states of the body. The spring of freedom is the
 activity of Intellectual-Principle, the highest in our being; the
 proposals emanating thence are freedom; such desires as are formed
 in the exercise of the Intellectual act cannot be classed as
 involuntary; the gods, therefore, that live in this state, living by
 Intellectual-Principle and by desire conformed to it, 
 possess freedom.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. It will be asked how act rising from desire can be voluntary,
 since desire pulls outward and implies need; to desire is still to
 be drawn, even though towards the good.
 
 Intellectual-Principle itself comes under the doubt; having a
 certain nature and acting by that nature can it be said to have
 freedom and self-disposal- in an act which it cannot leave
 unenacted? It may be asked, also, whether freedom may strictly be
 affirmed of such beings as are not engaged in action.
 
 However that may be, where there is such act there is compulsion
 from without, since, failing motive, act will not be performed.
 These higher beings, too, obey their own nature; where then is their
 freedom?
 
 But, on the other hand, can there be talk of constraint where
 there is no compulsion to obey an extern; and how can any movement
 towards a good be counted compulsion? Effort is free once it is
 towards a fully recognised good; the involuntary is, 
 precisely, motion
 away from a good and towards the enforced, towards something not
 recognised as a good; servitude lies in being powerless to move
 towards one's good, being debarred from the preferred path 
 in a menial
 obedience. Hence the shame of slavedom is incurred not when one is
 held from the hurtful but when the personal good must be yielded in
 favour of another's.
 
 Further, this objected obedience to the characteristic nature
 would imply a duality, master and mastered; but an undivided
 Principle, a simplex Activity, where there can be no difference of
 potentiality and act, must be free; there can be no thought 
 of "action
 according to the nature," in the sense of any distinction between
 the being and its efficiency, there where being and act are 
 identical.
 Where act is performed neither because of another nor at another's
 will, there surely is freedom. Freedom may of course be an
 inappropriate term: there is something greater here: it is
 self-disposal in the sense, only, that there is no disposal by the
 extern, no outside master over the act.
 
 In a principle, act and essence must be free. No doubt
 Intellectual-Principle itself is to be referred to a yet higher; but
 this higher is not extern to it; Intellectual-Principle is within
 the Good; possessing its own good in virtue of that indwelling, much
 more will it possess freedom and self-disposal which are sought only
 for the sake of the good. Acting towards the good, it must all the
 more possess self-disposal for by that Act it is directed towards
 the Principle from which it proceeds, and this its act is 
 self-centred
 and must entail its very greatest good.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. Are we, however, to make freedom and self-disposal 
 exclusive to
 Intellectual-Principle as engaged in its characteristic Act,
 Intellectual-Principle unassociated, or do they belong also to soul
 acting under that guidance and performing act of virtue?
 
 If freedom is to be allowed to soul in its Act, it certainly
 cannot be allowed in regard to issue, for we are not master 
 of events:
 if in regard to fine conduct and all inspired by
 Intellectual-Principle, that may very well be freedom; but is the
 freedom ours?
 
 Because there is war, we perform some brave feat; how is that
 our free act since had there been no war it could not have been
 performed? So in all cases of fine conduct; there is always some
 impinging event leading out our quality to show itself in 
 this or that
 act. And suppose virtue itself given the choice whether to find
 occasion for its exercise- war evoking courage; wrong, so that it
 may establish justice and good order; poverty that it may show
 independence- or to remain inactive, everything going well, it would
 choose the peace of inaction, nothing calling for its intervention,
 just as a physician like Hippocrates would prefer no one to stand in
 need of his skill.
 
 If thus virtue whose manifestation requires action becomes
 inevitably a collaborator under compulsion, how can it have
 untrammelled self-disposal?
 
 Should we, perhaps, distinguish between compulsion in the act
 and freedom in the preceding will and reasoning?
 
 But in setting freedom in those preceding functions, we 
 imply that
 virtue has a freedom and self-disposal apart from all act; then we
 must state what is the reality of the self-disposal attributed to
 virtue as state or disposition. Are we to put it that virtue comes
 in to restore the disordered soul, taming passions and appetites? In
 what sense, at that, can we hold our goodness to be our own free
 act, our fine conduct to be uncompelled? In that we will and 
 adopt, in
 that this entry of virtue prepares freedom and self-disposal, ending
 our slavery to the masters we have been obeying. If then 
 virtue is, as
 it were, a second Intellectual-Principle, and heightens the soul to
 Intellectual quality, then, once more, our freedom is found 
 to lie not
 in act but in Intellectual-Principle immune from act.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. How then did we come to place freedom in the will when we
 made out free action to be that produced- or as we also indicated,
 suppressed- at the dictate of will?
 
 If what we have been saying is true and our former statement is
 consistent with it, the case must stand thus:
 
 Virtue and Intellectual-Principle are sovereign and must be held
 the sole foundation of our self-disposal and freedom; both then are
 free; Intellectual-Principle is self-confined: Virtue, in its
 government of the soul which it seeks to lift into goodness, would
 wish to be free; in so far as it does so it is free and confers
 freedom; but inevitably experiences and actions are forced upon it
 by its governance: these it has not planned for, yet when they do
 arise it will watch still for its sovereignty calling these also to
 judgement. Virtue does not follow upon occurrences as a saver of the
 emperilled; at its discretion it sacrifices a man; it may decree the
 jettison of life, means, children, country even; it looks to its own
 high aim and not to the safeguarding of anything lower. Thus our
 freedom of act, our self-disposal, must be referred not to the
 doing, not to the external thing done but to the inner activity, to
 the Intellection, to virtue's own vision.
 
 So understood, virtue is a mode of Intellectual-Principle, a
 mode not involving any of the emotions or passions controlled by its
 reasonings, since such experiences, amenable to morality and
 discipline, touch closely- we read- on body.
 
 This makes it all the more evident that the unembodied is the
 free; to this our self-disposal is to be referred; herein lies our
 will which remains free and self-disposing in spite of any orders
 which it may necessarily utter to meet the external. All then that
 issues from will and is the effect of will is our free action; and
 in the highest degree all that lies outside of the corporeal 
 is purely
 within the scope of will, all that will adopts and brings,
 unimpeded, into existence.
 
 The contemplating Intellect, the first or highest, has
 self-disposal to the point that its operation is utterly
 independent; it turns wholly upon itself; its very action is itself;
 at rest in its good it is without need, complete, and may be said to
 live to its will; there the will is intellection: it is called will
 because it expresses the Intellectual-Principle in the willing-phase
 and, besides, what we know as will imitates this operation taking
 place within the Intellectual-Principle. Will strives 
 towards the good
 which the act of Intellectual-Principle realizes. Thus that
 principle holds what will seeks, that good whose attainment 
 makes will
 identical with Intellection.
 
 But if self-disposal is founded thus on the will aiming at the
 good, how can it possibly be denied to that principle permanently
 possessing the good, sole object of the aim?
 
 Any one scrupulous about setting self-disposal so high may find
 some loftier word.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. Soul becomes free when it moves, through
 Intellectual-Principle, towards The Good; what it does in that
 spirit is its free act; Intellectual-Principle is free in its own
 right. That principle of Good is the sole object of desire and the
 source of self-disposal to the rest, to soul when it fully 
 attains, to
 Intellectual-Principle by connate possession.
 
 How then can the sovereign of all that august sequence- the
 first in place, that to which all else strives to mount, all 
 dependent
 upon it and taking from it their powers even to this power of
 self-disposal- how can This be brought under the freedom belonging
 to you and me, a conception applicable only by violence to
 Intellectual-Principle itself?
 
 It is rash thinking drawn from another order that would imagine
 a First Principle to be chance- made what it is, controlled by a
 manner of being imposed from without, void therefore of freedom or
 self-disposal, acting or refraining under compulsion. Such a 
 statement
 is untrue to its subject and introduces much difficulty; it utterly
 annuls the principle of freewill with the very conception of our own
 voluntary action, so that there is no longer any sense in discussion
 upon these terms, empty names for the non-existent. Anyone upholding
 this opinion would be obliged to say not merely that free act exists
 nowhere but that the very word conveys nothing to him. To admit
 understanding the word is to be easily brought to confess that the
 conception of freedom does apply where it is denied. No doubt a
 concept leaves the reality untouched and unappropriated, for nothing
 can produce itself, bring itself into being; but thought insists
 upon distinguishing between what is subject to others and what is
 independent, bound under no allegiance, lord of its own act.
 
 This state of freedom belongs in the absolute degree to the
 Eternals in right of that eternity and to other beings in so far as
 without hindrance they possess or pursue The Good which, standing
 above them all, must manifestly be the only good they can reasonably
 seek.
 
 To say that The Good exists by chance must be false; chance
 belongs to the later, to the multiple; since the First has never
 come to be, we cannot speak of it either as coming by chance into
 being or as not master of its being. Absurd also the 
 objection that it
 acts in accordance with its being if this is to suggest that freedom
 demands act or other expression against the nature. Neither does its
 nature as the unique annul its freedom when this is the result of no
 compulsion but means only that The Good is no other than itself, is
 self-complete and has no higher.
 
 The objection would imply that where there is most good there is
 least freedom. If this is absurd, still more absurd to deny 
 freedom to
 The Good on the ground that it is good and self-concentred, not
 needing to lean upon anything else but actually being the Term to
 which all tends, itself moving to none.
 
 Where- since we must use such words- the essential act is
 identical with the being- and this identity must obtain in The Good
 since it holds even in Intellectual-Principle- there the act is no
 more determined by the Being than the Being by the Act. Thus
 "acting according to its nature" does not apply; the Act, the Life,
 so to speak, cannot be held to issue from the Being; the Being
 accompanies the Act in an eternal association: from the two 
 [Being and
 Act] it forms itself into The Good, self-springing and unspringing.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. But it is not, in our view, as an attribute that this freedom
 is present in the First. In the light of free acts, from which we
 eliminate the contraries, we recognise There self-determination,
 self-directed and, failing more suitable terms, we apply to it the
 lesser terms brought over from lesser things and so tell it 
 as best we
 may: no words could ever be adequate or even applicable to that from
 which all else- the noble, the august- is derived. For This is
 principle of all, or, more strictly, unrelated to all and, in this
 consideration, cannot be made to possess such laters as even freedom
 and self-disposal, which in fact indicate manifestation upon the
 extern- unhindered but implying the existence of other beings whose
 opposition proves ineffective.
 
 We cannot think of the First as moving towards any 
 other; He holds
 his own manner of being before any other was; even Being we withhold
 and therefore all relation to beings.
 
 Nor may we speak of any "conforming to the nature"; this again
 is of the later; if the term be applicable at all in that realm it
 applies only to the secondaries- primally to Essential Existence as
 next to this First. And if a "nature" belongs only to things of
 time, this conformity to nature does not apply even to Essential
 Existence. On the other hand, we are not to deny that it is derived
 from Essential Existence for that would be to take away its
 existence and would imply derivation from something else.
 
 Does this mean that the First is to be described as happening to
 be?
 
 No; that would be just as false; nothing "happens" to the First;
 it stands in no such relationship; happening belongs only to the
 multiple where, first, existence is given and then something 
 is added.
 And how could the Source "happen to be"? There has been no coming so
 that you can put it to the question "How does this come to be? What
 chance brought it here, gave it being?" Chance did not yet exist;
 there was no "automatic action": these imply something before
 themselves and occur in the realm of process.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. If we cannot but speak of Happening we must not halt at the
 word but look to the intention. And what is that? That the Supreme
 by possession of a certain nature and power is the Principle.
 Obviously if its nature were other it would be that other and if the
 difference were for the worse it would manifest itself as that
 lesser being. But we must add in correction that, as 
 Principle of All,
 it could not be some chance product; it is not enough to say that it
 could not be inferior; it could not even be in some way good, for
 instance in some less perfect degree; the Principle of All must be
 of higher quality than anything that follows it. It is therefore in
 a sense determined- determined, I mean, by its uniqueness and not in
 any sense of being under compulsion; compulsion did not co-exist
 with the Supreme but has place only among secondaries and even there
 can exercise no tyranny; this uniqueness is not from outside.
 
 This, then, it is; This and no other; simply what it must be; it
 has not "happened" but is what by a necessity prior to all 
 necessities
 it must be. We cannot think of it as a chance existence; it is not
 what it chanced to be but what it must be- and yet without a "Must."
 
 All the rest waits for the appearing of the king to hail him for
 himself, not a being of accident and happening but 
 authentically king,
 authentically Principle, The Good authentically, not a being 
 that acts
 in conformity with goodness- and so, recognisably, a secondary- but
 the total unity that he is, no moulding upon goodness but the very
 Good itself.
 
 Even Being is exempt from happening: of course, anything 
 happening
 happens to Being, but Being itself has not happened nor is the
 manner of its Being a thing of happening, of derivation; it is the
 very nature of Being to be; how then can we think that this
 happening can attach to the Transcendent of Being, That in 
 whose power
 lay the very engendering of Being?
 
 Certainly this Transcendent never happened to be what it 
 is; it is
 so, just as Being exists in complete identity with its own essential
 nature and that of Intellectual-Principle. Certainly that which has
 never passed outside of its own orbit, unbendingly what it 
 is, its own
 unchangeably, is that which may most strictly be said to possess its
 own being: what then are we to say when we mount and contemplate
 that which stands yet higher; can we conceivably say "Thus, as we
 see it, thus has it happened to be"? Neither thus nor in any mode
 did it happen to be; there is no happening; there is only a "Thus
 and No Otherwise than Thus." And even "Thus" is false; it would
 imply limit, a defined form: to know This is to be able to 
 reject both
 the "Thus" and the "Not-Thus," either of which classes among 
 Beings to
 which alone Manner of Being can attach.
 
 A "Thus" is something that attaches to everything in the world
 of things: standing before the indefinable you may name any of these
 sequents but you must say This is none of them: at most it is to be
 conceived as the total power towards things, supremely
 self-concentred, being what it wills to be or rather projecting into
 existence what it wills, itself higher than all will, will a thing
 beneath it. In a word it neither willed its own "Thus"- as something
 to conform to- nor did any other make it "Thus."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. The upholder of Happening must be asked how this false
 happening can be supposed to have come about, taking it that it did,
 and haw the happening, then, is not universally prevalent. 
 If there is
 to be a natural scheme at all, it must be admitted that this 
 happening
 does not and cannot exist: for if we attribute to chance the 
 Principle
 which is to eliminate chance from all the rest, how can there ever
 be anything independent of chance? And this Nature does take away
 the chanced from the rest, bringing in form and limit and shape. In
 the case of things thus conformed to reason the cause cannot be
 identified with chance but must lie in that very reason; chance must
 be kept for what occurs apart from choice and sequence and is purely
 concurrent. When we come to the source of all reason, order 
 and limit,
 how can we attribute the reality there to chance? Chance is no doubt
 master of many things but is not master of Intellectual-Principle,
 of reason, of order, so as to bring them into being. How 
 could chance,
 recognised as the very opposite of reason, be its Author? And if it
 does not produce Intellectual-Principle, then certainly not 
 that which
 precedes and surpasses that Principle. Chance, besides, has no means
 of producing, has no being at all, and, assuredly, none in the
 Eternal.
 
 Since there is nothing before Him who is the First, we 
 must call a
 halt; there is nothing to say; we may enquire into the origin of his
 sequents but not of Himself who has no origin.
 
 But perhaps, never having come to be but being as He is, He is
 still not master of his own essence: not master of his essence but
 being as He is, not self-originating but acting out of his nature as
 He finds it, must He not be of necessity what He is, inhibited from
 being otherwise?
 
 No: What He is, He is not because He could not be otherwise but
 because so is best. Not everything has power to move towards the
 better though nothing is prevented by any external from 
 moving towards
 the worse. But that the Supreme has not so moved is its own doing:
 there has been no inhibition; it has not moved simply because it is
 That which does not move; in this stability the inability to
 degenerate is not powerlessness; here permanence is very Act, a
 self-determination. This absence of declination comports the fulness
 of power; it is not the yielding of a being held and controlled but
 the Act of one who is necessity, law, to all.
 
 Does this indicate a Necessity which has brought itself into
 existence? No: there has been no coming into being in any 
 degree; This
 is that by which being is brought to all the rest, its 
 sequents. Above
 all origins, This can owe being neither to an extern nor to itself.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 11
 
 11. But this Unoriginating, what is it?
 
 We can but withdraw, silent, hopeless, and search no 
 further. What
 can we look for when we have reached the furthest? Every enquiry
 aims at a first and, that attained, rests.
 
 Besides, we must remember that all questioning deals with the
 nature of a thing, its quality, its cause or its essential being. In
 this case the being- in so far as we can use the word- is knowable
 only by its sequents: the question as to cause asks for a principle
 beyond, but the principle of all has no principle; the question as
 to quality would be looking for an attribute in that which has none:
 the question as to nature shows only that we must ask 
 nothing about it
 but merely take it into the mind if we may, with the knowledge
 gained that nothing can be permissibly connected with it.
 
 The difficulty this Principle presents to our mind in so 
 far as we
 can approach to conception of it may be exhibited thus:
 
 We begin by posing space, a place, a Chaos; into this existing
 container, real or fancied, we introduce God and proceed to enquire:
 we ask, for example, whence and how He comes to be there: we
 investigate the presence and quality of this new-comer projected
 into the midst of things here from some height or depth. But the
 difficulty disappears if we eliminate all space before we attempt to
 conceive God: He must not be set in anything either as enthroned in
 eternal immanence or as having made some entry into things: He is to
 be conceived as existing alone, in that existence which the
 necessity of discussion forces us to attribute to Him, with space
 and all the rest as later than Him- space latest of all. Thus we
 conceive as far as we may, the spaceless; we abolish the 
 notion of any
 environment: we circumscribe Him within no limit; we attribute no
 extension to Him; He has no quality since no shape, even shape
 Intellectual; He holds no relationship but exists in and for Himself
 before anything is.
 
 How can we think any longer of that "Thus He happened to be"?
 How make this one assertion of Him of whom all other assertion can
 be no more than negation? It is on the contrary nearer the truth to
 say "Thus He has happened not to be": that contains at least 
 the utter
 denial of his happening.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 12
 
 12. Yet, is not God what He is? Can He, then, be master of being
 what He is or master to stand above Being? The mind utterly
 reluctant returns to its doubt: some further considerations,
 therefore, must be offered:
 
 In us the individual, viewed as body, is far from 
 reality; by soul
 which especially constitutes the being we participate in reality,
 are in some degree real. This is a compound state, a mingling of
 Reality and Difference, not, therefore reality in the 
 strictest sense,
 not reality pure. Thus far we are not masters of our being; in some
 sense the reality in us is one thing and we another. We are not
 masters of our being; the real in us is the master, since that is
 the principle establishing our characteristic difference; yet we are
 again in some sense that which is sovereign in us and so even on
 this level might in spite of all be described as self-disposing.
 
 But in That which is wholly what it is- self-existing reality,
 without distinction between the total thing and its essence- 
 the being
 is a unit and is sovereign over itself; neither the being nor the
 essence is to be referred to any extern. Besides, the very 
 question as
 to self. disposal falls in the case of what is First in 
 reality; if it
 can be raised at all, we must declare that there can be no
 subjection whatever in That to which reality owes its 
 freedom, That in
 whose nature the conferring of freedom must clearly be vested,
 preeminently to be known as the liberator.
 
 Still, is not this Principle subject to its essential Being? On
 the contrary, it is the source of freedom to Being.
 
 Even if there be Act in the Supreme- an Act with which 
 it is to be
 identified- this is not enough to set up a duality within it and
 prevent it being entirely master of that self from which the Act
 springs; for the Act is not distinct from that self. If we utterly
 deny Act in it- holding that Act begins with others moving about it-
 we are all the less able to allow either self-mastery or 
 subjection in
 it: even self-mastery is absent here, not that anything else 
 is master
 over it but that self-mastery begins with Being while the Supreme is
 to be set in a higher order.
 
 But what can there be higher than that which is its own master?
 
 Where we speak of self-mastery there is a certain duality, Act
 against essence; from the exercise of the Act arises the 
 conception of
 the mastering principle- though one identical with the essence-
 hence arises the separate idea of mastery, and the being concerned
 is said to possess self-mastery. Where there is no such duality
 joining to unity but solely a unity pure- either because the Act is
 the whole being or because there is no Act at all- then we cannot
 strictly say that the being has this mastery of self.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 13
 
 13. Our enquiry obliges us to use terms not strictly applicable:
 we insist, once more, that not even for the purpose of forming the
 concept of the Supreme may we make it a duality; if now we do, it is
 merely for the sake of conveying conviction, at the cost of verbal
 accuracy.
 
 If, then, we are to allow Activities in the Supreme and make
 them depend upon will- and certainly Act cannot There be 
 will-less and
 these Activities are to be the very essence, then will and essence
 in the Supreme must be identical. This admitted, as He 
 willed to be so
 He is; it is no more true to say that He wills and acts as His
 nature determines than that His essence is as He wills and acts.
 Thus He is wholly master of Himself and holds His very being at His
 will.
 
 Consider also that every being in its pursuit of its 
 good seeks to
 be that good rather than what it is it judges itself most truly to
 be when it partakes of its good: in so far as it thus draws on its
 good its being is its choice: much more, then, must the very
 Principle, The Good, be desirable in itself when any 
 fragment of it is
 very desirable to the extern and becomes the chosen essence
 promoting that extern's will and identical with the will 
 that gave the
 existence?
 
 As long as a thing is apart from its good it seeks 
 outside itself;
 when it holds its good it itself as it is: and this is no matter of
 chance; the essence now is not outside of the will; by the good it
 is determined, by the good it is in self-possession.
 
 If then this Principle is the means of determination to 
 everything
 else, we see at once that self-possession must belong primally to
 it, so that, through it, others in their turn may be self-belonging:
 what we must call its essence comports its will to possess such a
 manner of being; we can form no idea of it without including 
 in it the
 will towards itself as it is. It must be a consistent self 
 willing its
 being and being what it wills; its will and itself must be one
 thing, all the more one from the absence of distinction between a
 given nature and one which would be preferred. What could The Good
 have wished to be other than what it is? Suppose it had the choice
 of being what it preferred, power to alter the nature, it could not
 prefer to be something else; it could have no fault to find with
 anything in its nature, as if that nature were imposed by force; The
 Good is what from always it wished and wishes to be. For the really
 existent Good is a willing towards itself, towards a good not gained
 by any wiles or even attracted to it by force of its nature; The
 Good is what it chose to be and, in fact, there was never anything
 outside it to which it could be drawn.
 
 It may be added that nothing else contains in its essence the
 principle of its own satisfaction; there will be inner discord: but
 this hypostasis of the Good must necessarily have self-option, the
 will towards the self; if it had not, it could not bring
 satisfaction to the beings whose contentment demands participation
 in it or imagination of it.
 
 Once more, we must be patient with language; we are forced to
 apply to the Supreme terms which strictly are ruled out; 
 everywhere we
 must read "So to speak." The Good, then, exists; it holds its
 existence through choice and will, conditions of its very being: yet
 it cannot be a manifold; therefore the will and the essential being
 must be taken as one identity; the act of the will must be
 self-determined and the being self-caused; thus reason shows the
 Supreme to be its own Author. For if the act of will springs from
 God Himself and is as it were His operation and the same will is
 identical with His essence, He must be self-established. He is not,
 therefore, "what He has happened to be" but what He has willed to be.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 14
 
 14. Another approach: Everything to which existence may be
 attributed is either one with its essence or distinct from it. Thus
 any given man is distinct from essential man though belonging to the
 order Man: a soul and a soul's essence are the same- that is, in
 case of soul pure and unmingled- Man as type is the same as man's
 essence; where the thing, man, and the essence are different, the
 particular man may be considered as accidental; but man, the
 essence, cannot be so; the type, Man, has Real Being. Now if the
 essence of man is real, not chanced or accidental, how can we think
 That to be accidental which transcends the order man, author of the
 type, source of all being, a principle more nearly simplex than
 man's being or being of any kind? As we approach the 
 simplex, accident
 recedes; what is utterly simplex accident never touches at all.
 
 Further we must remember what has been already said, that where
 there is true being, where things have been brought to 
 reality by that
 Principle- and this is true of whatsoever has determined condition
 within the order of sense- all that reality is brought about 
 in virtue
 of something emanating from the divine. By things of determined
 condition I mean such as contain, inbound with their essence, the
 reason of their being as they are, so that, later, an observer can
 state the use for each of the constituent parts- why the 
 eye, why feet
 of such and such a kind to such and such a being- and can recognise
 that the reason for the production of each organ is inherent in that
 particular being and that the parts exist for each other. Why feet
 of a certain length? Because another member is as it is: because the
 face is as it is, therefore the feet are what they are: in a word
 the mutual determinant is mutual adaptation and the reason of each
 of the several forms is that such is the plan of man.
 
 Thus the essence and its reason are one and the same. The
 constituent parts arise from the one source not because that source
 has so conceived each separately but because it has produced
 simultaneously the plan of the thing and its existence. This 
 therefore
 is author at once of the existence of things and of their reasons,
 both produced at the one stroke. It is in correspondence with the
 things of process but far more nearly archetypal and authentic and
 in a closer relation with the Better, their source, than they can be.
 
 Of things carrying their causes within, none arises at hazard or
 without purpose; this "So it happened to be" is applicable to none.
 All that they have comes from The Good; the Supreme itself, then, as
 author of reason, of causation, and of causing essence- all
 certainly lying far outside of chance- must be the Principle 
 and as it
 were the examplar of things, thus independent of hazard: it is, the
 First, the Authentic, immune from chance, from blind effect and
 happening: God is cause of Himself; for Himself and of Himself He is
 what He is, the first self, transcendently The Self.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 15
 
 15. Lovable, very love, the Supreme is also self-love in that He
 is lovely no otherwise than from Himself and in Himself. 
 Self-presence
 can hold only in the identity of associated with associating; since,
 in the Supreme, associated and associating are one, seeker and
 sought one the sought serving as Hypostasis and substrate of the
 seeker- once more God's being and his seeking are identical: once
 more, then, the Supreme is the self-producing, sovereign of Himself,
 not happening to be as some extern willed but existing as He 
 wills it.
 
 And when we say that neither does He absorb anything nor
 anything absorb Him, thus again we are setting Him outside of all
 happening- not only because we declare Him unique and 
 untouched by all
 but in another way also. Suppose we found such a nature in
 ourselves; we are untouched by all that has gathered round us
 subjecting us to happening and chance; all that accruement was of
 the servile and lay exposed to chance: by this new state alone we
 acquire self-disposal and free act, the freedom of that light
 which belongs to the order of the good and is good in actuality,
 greater than anything Intellectual-Principle has to give, an 
 actuality
 whose advantage over Intellection is no adventitious superiority.
 When we attain to this state and become This alone, what can we say
 but that we are more than free, more than self-disposing? 
 And who then
 could link us to chance, hazard, happening, when thus we are become
 veritable Life, entered into That which contains no alloy but is
 purely itself?
 
 Isolate anything else and the being is inadequate; the Supreme
 in isolation is still what it was. The First cannot be in 
 the soulless
 or in an unreasoning life; such a life is too feeble in being; it is
 reason dissipated, it is indetermination; only in the measure of
 approach towards reason is there liberation from happening; the
 rational is above chance. Ascending we come upon the Supreme, not as
 reason but as reason's better: thus God is far removed from all
 happening: the root of reason is self-springing.
 
 The Supreme is the Term of all; it is like the principle and
 ground of some vast tree of rational life; itself 
 unchanging, it gives
 reasoned being to the growth into which it enters.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 16
 
 16. We maintain, and it is evident truth, that the Supreme is
 everywhere and yet nowhere; keeping this constantly in mind 
 let us see
 how it bears on our present enquiry.
 
 If God is nowhere, then not anywhere has He "happened to be"; as
 also everywhere, He is everywhere in entirety: at once, He is that
 everywhere and everywise: He is not in the everywhere but is the
 everywhere as well as the giver to the rest of things of their being
 in that everywhere. Holding the supreme place- or rather no 
 holder but
 Himself the Supreme- all lies subject to Him; they have not brought
 Him to be but happen, all, to Him- or rather they stand there before
 Him looking upon Him, not He upon them. He is borne, so to speak, to
 the inmost of Himself in love of that pure radiance which He is, He
 Himself being that which He. loves. That is to say, as self-dwelling
 Act and Intellectual-Principle, the most to be loved, He has given
 Himself existence. Intellectual-Principle is the issue of Act: God
 therefore is issue of Act, but, since no other has generated Him, He
 is what He made Himself: He is not, therefore, "as He happened to
 be" but as He acted Himself into being.
 
 Again; if He preeminently is because He holds firmly, so 
 to speak,
 towards Himself, looking towards Himself, so that what we must call
 his being is this self-looking, He must again, since the word is
 inevitable, make Himself: thus, not "as He happens to be" is 
 He but as
 He Himself wills to be. Nor is this will a hazard, a something
 happening; the will adopting the Best is not a thing of chance.
 
 That his being is constituted by this self-originating
 self-tendence- at once Act and repose- becomes clear if we 
 imagine the
 contrary; inclining towards something outside of Himself, He would
 destroy the identity of his being. This self-directed Act is,
 therefore, his peculiar being, one with Himself. If, then, his act
 never came to be but is eternal- a waking without an awakener, an
 eternal wakening and a supra-Intellection- He is as He waked Himself
 to be. This awakening is before being, before
 Intellectual-Principle, before rational life, though He is these; He
 is thus an Act before Intellectual-Principle and consciousness and
 life; these come from Him and no other; his being, then, is a
 self-presence, issuing from Himself. Thus not "as He happened to be"
 is He but as He willed to be.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 17
 
 17. Or consider it another way: We hold the universe, with its
 content entire, to be as all would be if the design of the maker had
 so willed it, elaborating it with purpose and prevision by
 reasonings amounting to a Providence. All is always so and all is
 always so reproduced: therefore the reason-principles of things must
 lie always within the producing powers in a still more perfect form;
 these beings of the divine realm must therefore be previous to
 Providence and to preference; all that exists in the order of being
 must lie for ever There in their Intellectual mode. If this regime
 is to be called Providence it must be in the sense that before our
 universe there exists, not expressed in the outer, the
 Intellectual-Principle of all the All, its source and archetype.
 
 Now if there is thus an Intellectual-Principle before all
 things, their founding principle, this cannot be a thing 
 lying subject
 to chance- multiple, no doubt, but a concordance, ordered so to
 speak into oneness. Such a multiple- the co-ordination of all
 particulars and consisting of all the Reason-Principles of the
 universe gathered into the closest union- this cannot be a thing of
 chance, a thing "happening so to be." It must be of a very different
 nature, of the very contrary nature, separated from the other by all
 the difference between reason and reasonless chance. And if 
 the Source
 is precedent even to this, it must be continuous with this reasoned
 secondary so that the two be correspondent; the secondary must
 participate in the prior, be an expression of its will, be a power
 of it: that higher therefore [as above the ordering of reason] is
 without part or interval [implied by reasoned arrangement], is a
 one- all Reason-Principle, one number, a One greater than 
 its product,
 more powerful, having no higher or better. Thus the Supreme 
 can derive
 neither its being nor the quality of its being. God Himself,
 therefore, is what He is, self-related, self-tending; otherwise He
 becomes outward-tending, other-seeking- who cannot but be wholly
 self-poised.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 18
 
 18. Seeking Him, seek nothing of Him outside; within is to be
 sought what follows upon Him; Himself do not attempt. He is,
 Himself, that outer, He the encompassment and measure of all things;
 or rather He is within, at the innermost depth; the outer, circling
 round Him, so to speak, and wholly dependent upon Him, is
 Reason-Principle and Intellectual-Principle-or becomes
 Intellectual-Principle by contact with Him and in the degree of that
 contact and dependence; for from Him it takes the being 
 which makes it
 Intellectual-Principle.
 
 A circle related in its path to a centre must be admitted to owe
 its scope to that centre: it has something of the nature of that
 centre in that the radial lines converging on that one central point
 assimilate their impinging ends to that point of convergence and of
 departure, the dominant of radii and terminals: the terminals are of
 one nature with the centre, separate reproductions of it, since the
 centre is, in a certain sense, the total of terminals and radii
 impinging at every point upon it; these lines reveal the centre;
 they are the development of that undeveloped.
 
 In the same way we are to take Intellectual-Principle and Being.
 This combined power springs from the Supreme, an outflow and as it
 were development from That and remaining dependent upon that
 Intellective nature, showing forth That which, in the purity of its
 oneness, is not Intellectual-Principle since it is no 
 duality. No more
 than in the circle are the lines or circumference to be identified
 with that Centre which is the source of both: radii and circle are
 images given forth by indwelling power and, as products of a certain
 vigour in it, not cut off from it.
 
 Thus the Intellective power circles in its multiple unity around
 the Supreme which stands to it as archetype to image; the 
 image in its
 movement round about its prior has produced the multiplicity by
 which it is constituted Intellectual-Principle: that prior has no
 movement; it generates Intellectual-Principle by its sheer wealth.
 
 Such a power, author of Intellectual-Principle, author of being-
 how does it lend itself to chance, to hazard, to any "So it 
 happened"?
 
 What is present in Intellectual-Principle is present, though in
 a far transcendent mode, in the One: so in a light diffused afar
 from one light shining within itself, the diffused is vestige, the
 source is the true light; but Intellectual-Principle, the 
 diffused and
 image light, is not different in kind from its prior; and it is not
 a thing of chance but at every point is reason and cause.
 
 The Supreme is cause of the cause: it is cause 
 preeminently, cause
 as containing cause in the deepest and truest mode; for in it lie
 the Intellective causes which are to be unfolded from it, 
 author as it
 is not of the chance- made but of what the divine willed: and this
 willing was not apart from reason, was not in the realm of hazard
 and of what happened to present itself.
 
 Thus Plato, seeking the best account of the necessary and
 appropriate, says they are far removed from hazard and that what
 exists is what must exist: if thus the existence is as it must be it
 does not exist without reason: if its manner of being is the
 fitting, it is the utterly self-disposing in comparison with its
 sequents and, before that, in regard to itself: thus it is not "as
 it happened to be" but as it willed to be: all this, on the 
 assumption
 that God wills what should be and that it is impossible to separate
 right from realization and that this Necessary is not to God an
 outside thing but is, itself, His first Activity manifesting 
 outwardly
 in the exactly representative form. Thus we must speak of 
 God since we
 cannot tell Him as we would.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 19
 
 19. Stirred to the Supreme by what has been told, a man must
 strive to possess it directly; then he too will see, though still
 unable to tell it as he would wish.
 
 One seeing That as it really is will lay aside all reasoning
 upon it and simply state it as the self-existent; such that if it
 had essence that essence would be subject to it and, so to speak,
 derived from it; none that has seen would dare to talk of its
 "happening to be," or indeed be able to utter word. With all his
 courage he would stand astounded, unable at any venture to speak of
 This, with the vision everywhere before the eyes of the soul so
 that, look where one may, there it is seen unless one deliberately
 look away, ignoring God, thinking no more upon Him. So we are to
 understand the Beyond-Essence darkly indicated by the 
 ancients: is not
 merely that He generated Essence but that He is subject neither to
 Essence nor to Himself; His essence is not His Principle; He is
 Principle to Essence and not for Himself did He make it; producing
 it He left it outside of Himself: He had no need of being who
 brought it to be. Thus His making of being is no "action in 
 accordance
 with His being."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 20
 
 20. The difficulty will be raised that God would seem to have
 existed before thus coming into existence; if He makes Himself, then
 in regard to the self which He makes He is not yet in being and as
 maker He exists before this Himself thus made.
 
 The answer is that we utterly must not speak of Him as made but
 sheerly as maker; the making must be taken as absolved from all
 else; no new existence is established; the Act here is not 
 directed to
 an achievement but is God Himself unalloyed: here is no duality but
 pure unity. Let no one suspect us of asserting that the 
 first Activity
 is without Essence; on the contrary the Activity is the very
 reality. To suppose a reality without activity would be to make the
 Principle of all principles deficient; the supremely complete
 becomes incomplete. To make the Activity something superadded to
 the essence is to shatter the unity. If then Activity is a more
 perfect thing than essence and the First is all perfect, then the
 Activity is the First.
 
 By having acted, He is what He is and there is no question of
 "existing before bringing Himself into existence"; when He acted He
 was not in some state that could be described as "before 
 existing." He
 was already existent entirely.
 
 Now assuredly an Activity not subjected essence is utterly free;
 God's selfhood, then, is of his own Act. If his being has to be
 ensured by something else, He is no longer the self-existent 
 First: if
 it be true to say that He is his own container, then He inducts
 Himself; for all that He contains is his own production from the
 beginning since from the beginning He caused the being of all that
 by nature He contains.
 
 If there had been a moment from which He began to be, it would
 be possible assert his self-making in the literal sense; but, since
 what He is He is from before all time, his self-making is to be
 understood as simultaneous with Himself; the being is one 
 and the same
 with the making and eternal "coming into existence."
 
 This is the source also of his self-disposal- strictly
 applicable if there were a duality, but conveying, in the case of a
 unity, a disposing without a disposed, an abstract disposing. But
 how a disposer with nothing to dispose? In that there is here a
 disposer looking to a prior when there is none: since there is no
 prior, This is the First- but a First not in order but in 
 sovereignty,
 in power purely self-controlled. Purely; then nothing can be There
 that is under any external disposition; all in God is self-willing.
 What then is there of his content that is not Himself, what that is
 not in Act, what not his work? Imagine in Him anything not of his
 Act and at once His existence ceases to be pure; He is not
 self-disposing, not all-powerful: in that at least of whose doing He
 is not master He would be impotent.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 21
 
 21. Could He then have made Himself otherwise than as He did?
 
 If He could we must deny Him the power to produce goodness for
 He certainly cannot produce evil. Power, There, is no producer of
 the inapt; it is that steadfast constant which is most 
 decidedly power
 by inability to depart from unity: ability to produce the inapt
 inability to hold by the fitting; that self-making must be definite
 once for all since it is the right; besides, who could upset what is
 made by the will of God and is itself that will?
 
 But whence does He draw that will seeing that essence, source of
 will, is inactive in Him?
 
 The will was included in the essence; they were identical: or
 was there something, this will for instance, not existing in Him?
 All was will, nothing unwilled in Him. There is then nothing before
 that will: God and will were primally identical.
 
 God, therefore, is what He willed, is such as He willed; and all
 that ensued upon that willing was what that definite willing
 engendered: but it engendered nothing new; all existed from 
 the first.
 
 As for his "self-containing," this rightly understood can mean
 only that all the rest is maintained in virtue of Him by means of a
 certain participation; all traces back to the Supreme; God Himself,
 self-existing always, needs no containing, no participating; all in
 Him belongs to Him or rather He needs nothing from them in order to
 being Himself.
 
 When therefore you seek to state or to conceive Him, put all
 else aside; abstracting all, keep solely to Him; see that you add
 nothing; be sure that your theory of God does not lessen 
 Him. Even you
 are able to take contact with Something in which there is no 
 more than
 That Thing itself to affirm and know, Something which lies away
 above all and is- it alone- veritably free, subject not even to its
 own law, solely and essentially That One Thing, while all else is
 thing and something added.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 NINTH TRACTATE.
 
 
 ON THE GOOD, OR THE ONE.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 1
 
 1. It is in virtue of unity that beings are beings.
 
 This is equally true of things whose existence is primal and of
 all that are in any degree to be numbered among beings. What could
 exist at all except as one thing? Deprived of unity, a thing 
 ceases to
 be what it is called: no army unless as a unity: a chorus, a flock,
 must be one thing. Even house and ship demand unity, one house, one
 ship; unity gone, neither remains thus even continuous magnitudes
 could not exist without an inherent unity; break them apart and
 their very being is altered in the measure of the breach of unity.
 
 Take plant and animal; the material form stands a unity; fallen
 from that into a litter of fragments, the things have lost their
 being; what was is no longer there; it is replaced by quite other
 things- as many others, precisely, as possess unity.
 
 Health, similarly, is the condition of a body acting as a
 co-ordinate unity. Beauty appears when limbs and features are
 controlled by this principle, unity. Moral excellence is of a soul
 acting as a concordant total, brought to unity.
 
 Come thus to soul- which brings all to unity, making, moulding,
 shaping, ranging to order- there is a temptation to say "Soul is the
 bestower of unity; soul therefore is the unity." But soul bestows
 other characteristics upon material things and yet remains distinct
 from its gift: shape, Ideal-Form and the rest are all distinct from
 the giving soul; so, clearly, with this gift of unity; soul to make
 things unities looks out upon the unity just as it makes man by
 looking upon Man, realizing in the man the unity belonging to Man.
 
 Anything that can be described as a unity is so in the precise
 degree in which it holds a characteristic being; the less or more
 the degree of the being, the less or more the unity. Soul, while
 distinct from unity's very self, is a thing of the greater unity in
 proportion as it is of the greater, the authentic, being. Absolute
 unity it is not: it is soul and one soul, the unity in some sense a
 concomitant; there are two things, soul and soul's unity as there is
 body with body's unity. The looser aggregates, such as a choir, are
 furthest from unity, the more compact are the nearer; soul is nearer
 yet but still a participant.
 
 Is soul to be identified with unity on the ground that unless it
 were one thing it could not be soul? No; unity is equally 
 necessary to
 every other thing, yet unity stands distinct from them; body 
 and unity
 are not identical; body, too; is still a participant.
 
 Besides, the soul, even the collective soul for all its 
 absence of
 part, is a manifold: it has diverse powers- reasoning, desiring,
 perceiving- all held together by this chain of unity. Itself a
 unity, soul confers unity, but also accepts it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 2
 
 2. It may be suggested that, while in the unities of the partial
 order the essence and the unity are distinct, yet in collective
 existence, in Real Being, they are identical, so that when we have
 grasped Being we hold unity; Real Being would coincide with Unity.
 Thus, taking the Intellectual-Principle as Essential Being, that
 principle and the Unity Absolute would be at once Primal Being and
 Pure Unity, purveying, accordingly, to the rest of things 
 something of
 Being and something, in proportion, of the unity which is itself.
 
 There is nothing with which the unity would be more plausibly
 identified than with Being; either it is Being as a given man is man
 or it will correspond to the Number which rules in the realm of the
 particular; it will be a number applying to a certain unique thing
 as the number two applies to others.
 
 Now if Number is a thing among things, then clearly so this
 unity must be; we would have to discover what thing of things it is.
 If Number is not a thing but an operation of the mind moving out to
 reckon, then the unity will not be a thing.
 
 We found that anything losing unity loses its being; we are
 therefore obliged to enquire whether the unity in particulars is
 identical with the being, and unity absolute identical with 
 collective
 being.
 
 Now the being of the particular is a manifold; unity cannot be a
 manifold; there must therefore be a distinction between Being and
 Unity. Thus a man is at once a reasoning living being and a total of
 parts; his variety is held together by his unity; man therefore and
 unity are different- man a thing of parts against unity 
 partless. Much
 more must Collective Being, as container of all existence, be a
 manifold and therefore distinct from the unity in which it is but
 participant.
 
 Again, Collective Being contains life and intelligence- it is no
 dead thing- and so, once more, is a manifold.
 
 If Being is identical with Intellectual-Principle, even 
 at that it
 is a manifold; all the more so when count is taken of the Ideal
 Forms in it; for the Idea, particular or collective, is, after all,
 a numerable agglomeration whose unity is that of a kosmos.
 
 Above all, unity is The First: but Intellectual-Principle, Ideas
 and Being, cannot be so; for any member of the realm of Forms is an
 aggregation, a compound, and therefore- since components must
 precede their compound- is a later.
 
 Other considerations also go to show that the
 Intellectual-Principle cannot be the First. Intellect must be above
 the Intellectual Act: at least in its higher phase, that not 
 concerned
 with the outer universe, it must be intent upon its Prior; its
 introversion is a conversion upon the Principle.
 
 Considered as at once Thinker and Object of its Thought, it is
 dual, not simplex, not The Unity: considered as looking 
 beyond itself,
 it must look to a better, to a prior: looking simultaneously upon
 itself and upon its Transcendent, it is, once more, not a First.
 
 There is no other way of stating Intellectual-Principle than as
 that which, holding itself in the presence of The Good and First and
 looking towards That, is self-present also, self-knowing and Knowing
 itself as All-Being: thus manifold, it is far from being The Unity.
 
 In sum: The Unity cannot be the total of beings, for so its
 oneness is annulled; it cannot be the Intellectual-Principle, for so
 it would be that total which the Intellectual-Principle is; nor is
 it Being, for Being is the manifold of things.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 3
 
 3. What then must The Unity be, what nature is left for it?
 
 No wonder that to state it is not easy; even Being and Form are
 not easy, though we have a way, an approach through the Ideas.
 
 The soul or mind reaching towards the formless finds itself
 incompetent to grasp where nothing bounds it or to take impression
 where the impinging reality is diffuse; in sheer dread of holding to
 nothingness, it slips away. The state is painful; often it seeks
 relief by retreating from all this vagueness to the region of sense,
 there to rest as on solid ground, just as the sight distressed by
 the minute rests with pleasure on the bold.
 
 Soul must see in its own way; this is by coalescence, 
 unification;
 but in seeking thus to know the Unity it is prevented by that very
 unification from recognising that it has found; it cannot
 distinguish itself from the object of this intuition. Nonetheless,
 this is our one resource if our philosophy is to give us knowledge
 of The Unity.
 
 We are in search of unity; we are to come to know the 
 principle of
 all, the Good and First; therefore we may not stand away from the
 realm of Firsts and lie prostrate among the lasts: we must strike
 for those Firsts, rising from things of sense which are the lasts.
 Cleared of all evil in our intention towards The Good, we must
 ascend to the Principle within ourselves; from many, we must become
 one; only so do we attain to knowledge of that which is Principle
 and Unity. We shape ourselves into Intellectual-Principle; we make
 over our soul in trust to Intellectual-Principle and set it firmly
 in That; thus what That sees the soul will waken to see; it 
 is through
 the Intellectual-Principle that we have this vision of The Unity; it
 must be our care to bring over nothing whatever from sense, to allow
 nothing even of soul to enter into Intellectual-Principle: with
 Intellect pure, and with the summit of Intellect, we are to see the
 All-Pure.
 
 If quester has the impression of extension or shape or mass
 attaching to That Nature he has not been led by 
 Intellectual-Principle
 which is not of the order to see such things; the activity 
 has been of
 sense and of the judgement following upon sense: only
 Intellectual-Principle can inform us of the things of its scope; its
 competence is upon its priors, its content and its issue: 
 but even its
 content is outside of sense; and still purer, still less touched by
 multiplicity, are its priors, or rather its Prior.
 
 The Unity, then, is not Intellectual-Principle but something
 higher still: Intellectual-Principle is still a being but that First
 is no being but precedent to all Being; it cannot be a being, for a
 being has what we may call the shape of its reality but The Unity is
 without shape, even shape Intellectual.
 
 Generative of all, The Unity is none of all; neither thing nor
 quantity nor quality nor intellect nor soul; not in motion, not at
 rest, not in place, not in time: it is the self-defined, unique in
 form or, better, formless, existing before Form was, or Movement or
 Rest, all of which are attachments of Being and make Being the
 manifold it is.
 
 But how, if not in movement, can it be otherwise than at rest?
 
 The answer is that movement and rest are states pertaining to
 Being, which necessarily has one or the other or both. Besides,
 anything at rest must be so in virtue of Rest as something distinct:
 Unity at rest becomes the ground of an attribute and at once 
 ceases to
 be a simplex.
 
 Note, similarly, that, when we speak of this First as Cause, we
 are affirming something happening not to it but to us, the fact that
 we take from this Self-Enclosed: strictly we should put 
 neither a This
 nor a That to it; we hover, as it were, about it, seeking the
 statement of an experience of our own, sometimes nearing 
 this Reality,
 sometimes baffled by the enigma in which it dwells.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 4
 
 4. The main part of the difficulty is that awareness of this
 Principle comes neither by knowing nor by the Intellection that
 discovers the Intellectual Beings but by a presence overpassing all
 knowledge. In knowing, soul or mind abandons its unity; it cannot
 remain a simplex: knowing is taking account of things; that 
 accounting
 is multiple; the mind, thus plunging into number and multiplicity,
 departs from unity.
 
 Our way then takes us beyond knowing; there may be no wandering
 from unity; knowing and knowable must all be left aside; every
 object of thought, even the highest, we must pass by, for all that
 is good is later than This and derives from This as from the sun all
 the light of the day.
 
 "Not to be told; not to be written": in our writing and 
 telling we
 are but urging towards it: out of discussion we call to vision: to
 those desiring to see, we point the path; our teaching is of the
 road and the travelling; the seeing must be the very act of one that
 has made this choice.
 
 There are those that have not attained to see. The soul has not
 come to know the splendour There; it has not felt and clutched to
 itself that love-passion of vision known to lover come to rest where
 he loves. Or struck perhaps by that authentic light, all the soul
 lit by the nearness gained, we have gone weighted from beneath; the
 vision is frustrate; we should go without burden and we go carrying
 that which can but keep us back; we are not yet made over into unity.
 
 From none is that Principle absent and yet from all: present, it
 remains absent save to those fit to receive, disciplined into some
 accordance, able to touch it closely by their likeness and by that
 kindred power within themselves through which, remaining as it was
 when it came to them from the Supreme, they are enabled to see in so
 far as God may at all be seen.
 
 Failure to attain may be due to such impediment or to lack of
 the guiding thought that establishes trust; impediment we must
 charge against ourselves and strive by entire renunciation to become
 emancipate; where there is distrust for lack of convincing reason,
 further considerations may be applied:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 5
 
 5. Those to whom existence comes about by chance and automatic
 action and is held together by material forces have drifted far from
 God and from the concept of unity; we are not here 
 addressing them but
 only such as accept another nature than body and have some
 conception of soul.
 
 Soul must be sounded to the depths, understood as an emanation
 from Intellectual-Principle and as holding its value by a
 Reason-Principle thence infused. Next this Intellect must be
 apprehended, an Intellect other than the reasoning faculty known as
 the rational principle; with reasoning we are already in the 
 region of
 separation and movement: our sciences are Reason-Principles lodged
 in soul or mind, having manifestly acquired their character by the
 presence in the soul of Intellectual-Principle, source of 
 all knowing.
 
 Thus we come to see Intellectual-Principle almost as an object
 of sense: the Intellectual Kosmos is perceptible as standing above
 soul, father to soul: we know Intellectual-Principle as the
 motionless, not subject to change, containing, we must think, all
 things; a multiple but at once indivisible and comporting
 difference. It is not discriminate as are the 
 Reason-Principles, which
 can in fact be known one by one: yet its content is not a confusion;
 every item stands forth distinctly, just as in a science the entire
 content holds as an indivisible and yet each item is a self-standing
 verity.
 
 Now a plurality thus concentrated like the Intellectual Kosmos
 is close upon The First- and reason certifies its existence as
 surely as that of soul- yet, though of higher sovereignty than soul,
 it is not The First since it is not a unity, not simplex as unity,
 principle over all multiplicity, must be.
 
 Before it there is That which must transcend the noblest of the
 things of Being: there must be a prior to this Principle which
 aiming towards unity is yet not unity but a thing in unity's 
 likeness.
 From this highest it is not sundered; it too is 
 self-present: so close
 to the unity, it cannot be articulated: and yet it is a principle
 which in some measure has dared secession.
 
 That awesome Prior, The Unity, is not a being, for so its unity
 would be vested in something else: strictly no name is apt to it,
 but since name it we must there is a certain rough fitness in
 designating it as unity with the understanding that it is not the
 unity of some other thing.
 
 Thus it eludes our knowledge, so that the nearer 
 approach to it is
 through its offspring, Being: we know it as cause of existence to
 Intellectual-Principle, as fount of all that is best, as the
 efficacy which, self-perduring and undiminishing, generates 
 all beings
 and is not to be counted among these its derivatives, to all of
 which it must be prior.
 
 This we can but name The Unity, indicating it to each other by a
 designation that points to the concept of its partlessness while we
 are in reality striving to bring our own minds to unity. We 
 are not to
 think of such unity and partlessness as belong to point or monad;
 the veritable unity is the source of all such quantity which 
 could not
 exist unless first there existed Being and Being's Prior: we are
 not, then, to think in the order of point and monad but to use
 these- in their rejection of magnitude and partition- as symbols for
 the higher concept.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 6
 
 6. In what sense, then, do we assert this Unity, and how is it
 to be adjusted to our mental processes?
 
 Its oneness must not be entitled to that of monad and point: for
 these the mind abstracts extension and numerical quantity and rests
 upon the very minutest possible, ending no doubt in the partless but
 still in something that began as a partible and is always lodged in
 something other than itself. The Unity was never in any other and
 never belonged to the partible: nor is its impartibility that of
 extreme minuteness; on the contrary it is great beyond 
 anything, great
 not in extension but in power, sizeless by its very greatness as
 even its immediate sequents are impartible not in mass but in might.
 We must therefore take the Unity as infinite not in measureless
 extension or numerable quantity but in fathomless depths of power.
 
 Think of The One as Mind or as God, you think too meanly; use
 all the resources of understanding to conceive this Unity and,
 again, it is more authentically one than God, even though you reach
 for God's unity beyond the unity the most perfect you can conceive.
 For This is utterly a self-existent, with no concomitant whatever.
 This self-sufficing is the essence of its unity. Something there
 must be supremely adequate, autonomous, all-transcending, 
 most utterly
 without need.
 
 Any manifold, anything beneath The Unity, is dependent; combined
 from various constituents, its essential nature goes in need 
 of unity;
 but unity cannot need itself; it stands unity accomplished. Again, a
 manifold depends upon all its factors; and furthermore each of those
 factors in turn- as necessarily inbound with the rest and not
 self-standing- sets up a similar need both to its associates and to
 the total so constituted.
 
 The sovranly self-sufficing principle will be Unity-Absolute, for
 only in this Unity is there a nature above all need, whether within
 itself or in regard to the rest of things. Unity seeks 
 nothing towards
 its being or its well-being or its safehold upon existence; cause to
 all, how can it acquire its character outside of itself or know any
 good outside? The good of its being can be no borrowing: This is The
 Good. Nor has it station; it needs no standing ground as if 
 inadequate
 to its own sustaining; what calls for such underpropping is the
 soulless, some material mass that must be based or fall. This is
 base to all, cause of universal existence and of ordered station.
 All that demands place is in need; a First cannot go in need of its
 sequents: all need is effort towards a first principle; the First,
 principle to all, must be utterly without need. If the Unity be
 seeking, it must inevitably be seeking to be something other than
 itself; it is seeking its own destroyer. Whatever may be 
 said to be in
 need of a good is needing a preserver; nothing can be a good to The
 Unity, therefore.
 
 Neither can it have will to anything; it is a Beyond-Good, not
 even to itself a good but to such beings only as may be of quality
 to have part with it. Nor has it Intellection; that would comport
 diversity: nor Movement; it is prior to Movement as to Intellection.
 
 To what could its Intellection be directed? To itself? But that
 would imply a previous ignorance; it would be dependent upon that
 Intellection in order to knowledge of itself; but it is the
 self-sufficing. Yet this absence of self-knowing does not comport
 ignorance; ignorance is of something outside- a knower ignorant of a
 knowable- but in the Solitary there is neither knowing nor anything
 unknown. Unity, self-present, it has no need of self-intellection:
 indeed this "self-presence" were better left out, the more surely to
 preserve the unity; we must eliminate all knowing and all 
 association,
 all intellection whether internal or external. It is not to be
 though of as having but as being Intellection; Intellection does not
 itself perform the intellective act but is the cause of the act in
 something else, and cause is not to be identified with caused: most
 assuredly the cause of all is not a thing within that all.
 
 This Principle is not, therefore, to be identified with the good
 of which it is the source; it is good in the unique mode of being
 The Good above all that is good.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 7
 
 7. If the mind reels before something thus alien to all we know,
 we must take our stand on the things of this realm and strive thence
 to see. But, in the looking, beware of throwing outward; this
 Principle does not lie away somewhere leaving the rest void; to
 those of power to reach, it is present; to the inapt, absent. In our
 daily affairs we cannot hold an object in mind if we have given
 ourselves elsewhere, occupied upon some other matter; that very
 thing must be before us to be truly the object of 
 observation. So here
 also; preoccupied by the impress of something else, we are withheld
 under that pressure from becoming aware of The Unity; a mind gripped
 and fastened by some definite thing cannot take the print of the
 very contrary. As Matter, it is agreed, must be void of quality in
 order to accept the types of the universe, so and much more must the
 soul be kept formless if there is to be no infixed impediment to
 prevent it being brimmed and lit by the Primal Principle.
 
 In sum, we must withdraw from all the extern, pointed wholly
 inwards; no leaning to the outer; the total of things ignored, first
 in their relation to us and later in the very idea; the self put out
 of mind in the contemplation of the Supreme; all the commerce so
 closely There that, if report were possible, one might become to
 others reporter of that communion.
 
 Such converse, we may suppose, was that of Minos, thence known
 as the Familiar of Zeus; and in that memory he established the laws
 which report it, enlarged to that task by his vision There. Some, on
 the other hand, there will be to disdain such citizen service,
 choosing to remain in the higher: these will be those that have seen
 much.
 
 God- we read- is outside of none, present unperceived to all; we
 break away from Him, or rather from ourselves; what we turn from we
 cannot reach; astray ourselves, we cannot go in search of another; a
 child distraught will not recognise its father; to find ourselves is
 to know our source.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 8
 
 8. Every soul that knows its history is aware, also, that its
 movement, unthwarted, is not that of an outgoing line; its natural
 course may be likened to that in which a circle turns not upon some
 external but on its own centre, the point to which it owes its rise.
 The soul's movement will be about its source; to this it will hold,
 poised intent towards that unity to which all souls should move and
 the divine souls always move, divine in virtue of that movement; for
 to be a god is to be integral with the Supreme; what stands away is
 man still multiple, or beast.
 
 Is then this "centre" of our souls the Principle for which we
 are seeking?
 
 We must look yet further: we must admit a Principle in which all
 these centres coincide: it will be a centre by analogy with 
 the centre
 of the circle we know. The soul is not a circle in the sense of the
 geometric figure but in that it at once contains the Primal 
 Nature [as
 centre] and is contained by it [as circumference], that it owes its
 origin to such a centre and still more that the soul,
 uncontaminated, is a self-contained entity.
 
 In our present state- part of our being weighed down by the
 body, as one might have the feet under water with all the rest
 untouched- we bear- ourselves aloft by that- intact part 
 and, in that,
 hold through our own centre to the centre of all the centres, just
 as the centres of the great circles of a sphere coincide with that
 of the sphere to which all belong. Thus we are secure.
 
 If these circles were material and not spiritual, the link with
 the centres would be local; they would lie round it where it lay at
 some distant point: since the souls are of the Intellectual, and the
 Supreme still loftier, we understand that contact is otherwise
 procured, that is by those powers which connect Intellectual agent
 with Intellectual Object; this all the more, since the Intellect
 grasps the Intellectual object by the way of similarity, identity,
 in the sure link of kindred. Material mass cannot blend into other
 material mass: unbodied beings are not under this bodily limitation;
 their separation is solely that of otherness, of differentiation; in
 the absence of otherness, it is similars mutually present.
 
 Thus the Supreme as containing no otherness is ever present with
 us; we with it when we put otherness away. It is not that the
 Supreme reaches out to us seeking our communion: we reach towards
 the Supreme; it is we that become present. We are always before it:
 but we do not always look: thus a choir, singing set in due order
 about the conductor, may turn away from that centre to which all
 should attend: let it but face aright and it sings with beauty,
 present effectively. We are ever before the Supreme- cut off is
 utter dissolution; we can no longer be- but we do not always attend:
 when we look, our Term is attained; this is rest; this is the end of
 singing ill; effectively before Him, we lift a choral song full of
 God.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 9
 
 9. In this choiring, the soul looks upon the wellspring of Life,
 wellspring also of Intellect, beginning of Being, fount of Good,
 root of Soul. It is not that these are poured out from the Supreme
 lessening it as if it were a thing of mass. At that the 
 emanants would
 be perishable; but they are eternal; they spring from an eternal
 principle, which produces them not by its fragmentation but in
 virtue of its intact identity: therefore they too hold firm; so long
 as the sun shines, so long there will be light.
 
 We have not been cut away; we are not separate, what though the
 body-nature has closed about us to press us to itself; we breathe
 and hold our ground because the Supreme does not give and pass but
 gives on for ever, so long as it remains what it is.
 
 Our being is the fuller for our turning Thither; this is our
 prosperity; to hold aloof is loneliness and lessening. Here is the
 soul's peace, outside of evil, refuge taken in the place clean of
 wrong; here it has its Act, its true knowing; here it is immune.
 Here is living, the true; that of to-day, all living apart from Him,
 is but a shadow, a mimicry. Life in the Supreme is the 
 native activity
 of Intellect; in virtue of that converse it brings forth gods,
 brings forth beauty, brings forth righteousness, brings forth all
 moral good; for of all these the soul is pregnant when it has been
 filled with God. This state is its first and its final, because from
 God it comes, its good lies There, and, once turned to God again, it
 is what it was. Life here, with the things of earth, is a sinking, a
 defeat, a failing of the wing.
 
 That our good is There is shown by the very love inborn with the
 soul; hence the constant linking of the Love-God with the Psyches in
 story and picture; the soul, other than God but sprung of Him, must
 needs love. So long as it is There, it holds the heavenly love; here
 its love is the baser; There the soul is Aphrodite of the heavens;
 here, turned harlot, Aphrodite of the public ways: yet the soul is
 always an Aphrodite. This is the intention of the myth which tells
 of Aphrodite's birth and Eros born with her.
 
 The soul in its nature loves God and longs to be at one with Him
 in the noble love of a daughter for a noble father; but coming to
 human birth and lured by the courtships of this sphere, she takes up
 with another love, a mortal, leaves her father and falls.
 
 But one day coming to hate her shame, she puts away the evil of
 earth, once more seeks the father, and finds her peace.
 
 Those to whom all this experience is strange may 
 understand by way
 of our earthly longings and the joy we have in winning to 
 what we most
 desire- remembering always that here what we love is perishable,
 hurtful, that our loving is of mimicries and turns awry because all
 was a mistake, our good was not here, this was not what we sought;
 There only is our veritable love and There we may hold it and be
 with it, possess it in its verity no longer submerged in alien
 flesh. Any that have seen know what I have in mind: the soul takes
 another life as it approaches God; thus restored it feels that the
 dispenser of true life is There to see, that now we have nothing to
 look for but, far otherwise, that we must put aside all else and
 rest in This alone, This become, This alone, all the earthly
 environment done away, in haste to be free, impatient of any bond
 holding us to the baser, so that with our being entire we may cling
 about This, no part in us remaining but through it we have touch
 with God.
 
 Thus we have all the vision that may be of Him and of ourselves;
 but it is of a self-wrought to splendour, brimmed with the
 Intellectual light, become that very light, pure, buoyant, 
 unburdened,
 raised to Godhood or, better, knowing its Godhood, all aflame then-
 but crushed out once more if it should take up the discarded burden.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 Section 10
 
 10. But how comes the soul not to keep that ground?
 
 Because it has not yet escaped wholly: but there will be the
 time of vision unbroken, the self hindered no longer by any
 hindrance of body. Not that those hindrances beset that in us which
 has veritably seen; it is the other phase of the soul that 
 suffers and
 that only when we withdraw from vision and take to knowing by proof,
 by evidence, by the reasoning processes of the mental habit. Such
 logic is not to be confounded with that act of ours in the vision;
 it is not our reason that has seen; it is something greater than
 reason, reason's Prior, as far above reason as the very 
 object of that
 thought must be.
 
 In our self-seeing There, the self is seen as belonging to that
 order, or rather we are merged into that self in us which has the
 quality of that order. It is a knowing of the self restored to its
 purity. No doubt we should not speak of seeing; but we cannot help
 talking in dualities, seen and seer, instead of, boldly, the
 achievement of unity. In this seeing, we neither hold an object nor
 trace distinction; there is no two. The man is changed, no longer
 himself nor self-belonging; he is merged with the Supreme, 
 sunken into
 it, one with it: centre coincides with centre, for on this higher
 plane things that touch at all are one; only in separation is there
 duality; by our holding away, the Supreme is set outside. This is
 why the vision baffles telling; we cannot detach the Supreme to
 state it; if we have seen something thus detached we have failed of
 the Supreme which is to be known only as one with ourselves.
 
 
 
 
 
 